A Manual of Prophetic ijadi ths with Commentary
In. the- name- of Allah,
Most Gracious, Most Merciful.
All praise- be- to Allah,
Lord of the- Worlds,
and peace- and blessings be-
upon. His Messenger Mu}_lammad,
Mercy to the- Worlds
MUI;IAMMAD ~SHIQ ILAHI AL- BULANDSHEHRI

PROVISIONS

FOR THE SEEKERS

A MANUAL OF PROPHETIC I;IADITHS WITH COMMENTARY
A TRANSLATION AND COMMENTARY OF ZAD AL-'fALIBIN
BY ABDUR-RAHMAN IBN YUSUF

                                                                                                           PRESS
                                                                                                                  LONDON · SANTA BARBARA

                                                                                                                                                       2014
© Abdur- Rahman ibn Yusuf Mangera 2005
First Edition 1996
Second revised and extended edition June 2005
Reprint September 2009 and January 2014

All rights reserved. Aside from fair use, meaning a few pages or less for non-profit
educational purposes, review, or scholarly citation, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission
of the copyright owner.

ISBN 978-0-9728358-8-6

Published by:
White Thread Press
London · Santa Barbara
info@whitethreadpress.com
www.whitethreadpress.com

Distributed in the UK by Azhar Academy Ltd. London
sales@azharacademy.com Tel: +44 (208) 911 9797

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

'Ashiq Ilahl, Mu]:lammad.
  [Zad al-Talibin. English]
  Provisions for the seekers: a manual of prophetic hadiths with commentary

I a translation and commentary of Muhammad Ashiq Ilahi al-Bulandshehri's Zad
al-Talibin by Abdur Rahman ibn Yusuf.- 2nd ed.

     p.cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN o-9728358-8-1 (softcover: alk. paper)
 1. Hadith-Commentaries. 2. Hadith-Criticism, interpretation, etc. I.
Ibn Yusuf, Abdur-Rahman, 1974- II. Title.
  BP135.A1A8513 2005
  297.1'2407-dc22

                                             2005009348

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data. A catalogue record for this book is also
available from the British Library.

0 Printed and bound in the United States of America on premium acid-free paper. The paper

used in this book meets the minimum requirement of ANSI!NISO Z39.48-1992 (R 1997)
(Permanence of Paper). The binding material has been chosen for strength and durability.

Cover image from Corbis
Jacket design by Ather Ali
Book design and typography by ARM
'For :Mufti Shabbir .Jlhmad Patel
TRANSLITERATION KEY

, (1 !)' (A slight catch in the breath. It  t. ', 'a, 'i, 'u (Pronounced from the
      is also used to indicate where the
      hamza has been dropped from the             throat.)
      beginning of a word.)
                                            t_ gh (Pronounced like a throaty
    a, a                                         French r with the mouth hollowed

      b                                           to produce a full sound.)

.;.., th (Should be pronounced as the th    Jf
      in thin or thirst.)
                                            J q (A guttural q sound with the
c.
                                                  mouth hollowed to produce a full
C }:1 (Tensely breathed h sound.)                 sound.)
                                            .:.1 k
t kh (Pronounced like the ch in
                                            J
     Scottish loch with the mouth                 m
      hollowed to produce a full sound.)
     d                                      0n
      dh (Should be pronounced as the th
      in this or that.)                     J w, U, u.

Jr                                                h
     z
      s                                     <.? y, I, i
      sh
                                            ~ Salla 'Llahu 'alayhi wa sallam-used
<./ ~ (A heavy s pronounced far back in           following the mention ofthe Messenger
      the mouth with the mouth hollowed           MuJ:tammad, translated as, "May Allah
      to produce a full sound.)                   bless him and give him peace:'

c.? 9. (A heavy d!dh pronounced far         iJ>!ili 'Alayhi 's-sallam-used following the
                                                  mention of a Prophet or Messenger of
      back in the mouth with the mouth            Allah, translated as, "May the peace of
      hollowed to produce a full sound.)          Allah be upon him:'

.J. t (A heavy t pronounced far back in     ~ Racfiya 'Llahu 'anhu-used following
                                                  the mention of a Companion of the
      the mouth with the mouth hollowed           Messenger, translated as, "May Allah
      to produce a full sound.)                   be pleased with him."
.J; "? (A heavy dh pronounced far
      back in the mouth with the mouth      ~ Racfiya 'Llahu 'anhum-used following
      hollowed to produce a full sound.)          the mention of more than one
                                                  Companion of the Messenger (and
                                                   also after a female Companion in this
                                                  work for lack of an appropriate glyph),
                                                  translated as, "May Allah be pleased
                                                  with them:'

6
                          CoNTENTs

FOREWORD                                                  9

AUTHOR's PREFACE                                          11

INTRODUCTION                                              13

PART 1

COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS, SPRINGS OF WISDOM

& SOUND ADMONITION                                        23

Nominal Sentences                                         26

Another Form of Nominal Sentences                         41

Nominal Sentences Beginning With the Particle La          49

Nominal Sentences Beginning With the Particle Inna        51

Nominal Sentences Beginning With the Particle Innama      6o

Verbal Sentences                                          61

Verbal Sentences Beginning With the Negating La Particle  64

Imperative and Prohibitive Sentences                      69

The Irregular Verb Laysa                                  81

Conditional Sentences Beginning With Man                  84

More Conditional Sentences Beginning With Idha            107

PART2

SOME UNSEEN EVENTS WHICH THE MESSENGER ~

PROPHESIED & WHICH OCCURRED AFTER HIS DEMISE              113

PART 3

STORIES & ACCOUNTS (40 NARRATIONS)                        129

FURTHER STUDY REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIOGRAPHIES
INDEX
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

                                                          7
               The Messenger of Allah ® said,
':May ..7lllah make radiant [the face of] one who heard what
1 said, learned it by heart, and transmitted it as he heard it"

                             'Tirmidh'i
                            FOREWORD

In the name of Allah.

Over the years, as the need arose, there have been numerous changes in the
educational curriculum of religious madrasas.

   The duration ofthe original Islamic educational curriculum [around the
Muslim world] at one time used to be twelve years long-and sometimes
even longer than that-during which time math, science, engineering,
astronomy, history, and medicine used to be taught in particular. One of
the greatest supporters of this old and lengthy curriculum was our spiri-
tual guide and mentor, Shaykh al- I:fadith Mawlana Mul).ammad Zakariyya
Muhajir Madani (may Allah have mercy on him). However, when someone
requested him for an abridged curriculum, his eminence compiled a five-year
curriculum-beginning with the beginner books of Arabic syntax (na~w)
and morphology (~arf) through the completion of the final year of I:fadith
Study (Dawrat al-lfadith)-and sent it to him.

    When I prepared a six-year Islamic curriculum for Darul Uloom Bury
UK [since a mandatory curriculum existed in the UK already consisting
of many of the secular subjects] and presented it to Shaykh Zakariyya
Kandhlawi in the illuminated city of Madina for revision and approval, he
made two copies and sent them to two scholars to review it and give their
opinion regarding it. One copy was sent to the headmaster of Nadwatul
Ulama [Lucknow], and a second was presented to Mawlana 'Ashiq Ilahi
al-Bulandshehri al-Madni [who approved it]. This same six-year modified
curriculum was adapted as the official curriculum for Darul Uloom Bury
and has been followed ever since.

    Mawlana Mufti 'Ashiq Ilahi, during his residency in the pleasant city of
Madina, under the instruction and guidance ofShaykh Zakariyya, undertook
many educational writings and wrote scores ofbooks on various educational,

                                                                                                       9
10 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

reformative, juridical, and l,ladith-related subjects, from which the Muslim
Umma today greatly benefits.

    One of these books was the Zad al-talibln, in which he provided exer-
cises in Arabic grammar through the blessed statements ofthe Prophet, the
Mercy of the Worlds ~-

    Mawhina Abdur-Rahman Mangera has compiled a beneficial commen-
tary of this book for the English-speaking world. I pray that Allah bestow
this work with noble acceptance and make this work a means [for all] to
attain closeness to His Messenger ~- Amln.

                                                               [SHAYKH] YusuF MoTALA

                                                            Rector and Senior l:fadith Teacher
                                                                      Darul Uloom Holcombe
                                                                                             Bury, UK

                                      I Rabi' a!-Thani 14, 1426 May 23, 2005
                       AuTHoR's PREFACE

FORTY-TWO YEARS HAVE passed since the first edition of Zad al-talibin
    was published. In compiling it, I had three objectives before me:
    First, I wished to introduce into the syllabus taught in most madrasas
in the Subcontinent (Dars-e Ni:?iimi) a short compilation ofl).adiths which
could be taught at the preliminary stages of the course.

    Second, I tailored the format of the book to facilitate the grammatical
rearing of students still in the infancy of their studies.

    Last and most important, I felt that, as the majority of its readers would
be in their early teens if not childhood, early acquaintance with l).adiths, a
general familiarity with their style, eloquence, and beauty, and an appre-
ciation of their infinite value to human life, would be of overwhelming
advantage to them and guide them in all spheres of life.

    The book proved to be extremely popular. Islamic institutes in Africa,
Europe, and Asia (notably the examination board of Pakistan) included it in
their curricula. Concise commentaries of the book, detailing grammatical
structures, meanings of words, and explanations ofl).adiths, have also been
prepared in Urdu and Persian by numerous scholars.

    Very recently, the book has been translated into English by Mawlana
Abdur-Rahman, who has also added to it some very useful footnotes.
Although, as I have already explained, the book was first published for
Arabic language students, I feel the English version allows access to a far
wider readership. The l).adiths which have been selected for the book cover
topics of huge diversity and shed light on virtually all aspects of human life.
Most of them are not complete narrations but short quotations extracted
from longer l).adiths.

                                                                                                                                           11
12 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

    I congratulate the Mawlana on his excellent work. May Allah accept his
efforts and grant the book every success, for only through Him can anything
ever be achieved.

                                                     Forever in need of his Lord Most High

                                                                                'AsHIQ lLAHI AL-BULANDSHEHRI

                                                                    Al-Madina al-Munawwara
                                                                                     Rajab 26, 1417
                         INTRODUCTION

 A LL PRAISE IS FOR ALLAH, the Loving Lord ofthe universe, who bestowed

1"\.us with faith. Peace and blessings be upon His most beloved Messenger,

Mul,lammad, and all of the messengers of Allah, who guided mankind to
 their Lord and to the path of eternal bliss and happiness.

    Imam Nawaw1 says in his Taqrlb, "The science of l,ladith is the noblest
 means of attaining closeness to the Lord of the Worlds. How can it not be
 so, when it is the exposition of the way of the best of mankind and the most
 noble of the first and last of creation, Mul,lammad It;?" No doubt, a thing
 is honored by the honor of whom it is connected to. Moreover, the science
 ofl,ladith is the means to all Islamic sciences, including understanding the
 Qur'an and developing an Islamic lifestyle.

The fawam{ al-Kalim.

The Messenger of Allah ® was given an exceptional ability to convey in a

 few, simple, and beautifully phrased words, meanings that embrace whole
 libraries ofwisdoms and truths. The Messenger It; himself said, "I have been
 sent with the jawami' al-kalim" (Bukharl), i.e., comprehensive but concise
 language that is able to express a multitude of meanings in few words. He
was known to confine himself to conciseness and non-superfluous speech.
 Each one of these is a gem worthy of being written in gold.

     Today, one can find many a book on proverbs and quotations from
 historical personages, religious and political leaders on the shelves of
 bookstores and libraries, but the eloquence of the final Messenger of Allah
 ~ outshines them all in beauty, completeness, and wisdom. Sages and
 great philosophers appear as struggling students in the light of his divinely
 inspired wisdom. To cite an example of his speech, the Messenger of Allah

                                                                                                 13
14 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

~said, "The religion is sincerity" (Bukharl, Muslim). Scholars have written
pages elucidating the seemingly endless applications, meanings, and wis-
doms contained in this expression of two words (~I <J...lll) in the Arabic
language (see }:ladith 1).

    For generations, Muslims all over the world have found great under-
standing and inspiration in the profound statements of the Messenger of
Allah ~, which have provided them a guiding hand in navigating through
the different aspects of their lives with goodness and virtue. Many scholars
thus compiled books on these }:ladiths ofAllah's Messenger~, among which
is Zad al-talibin.

Zad al- Talibin
This book is a collection of 327 }:ladiths which the author, Shaykh 'Ashiq
Ilahi al-Bulandshehri, compiled from 'Allama Tabrizi's renowned }:ladith
compilation, Mishkat al-Ma~abi~. The first chapter contains 261 of these
comprehensive gems of wisdom from Allah's Messenger ~, followed by
25 }:ladiths on prophecy, and then a concluding chapter consisting of 40
accounts and narratives. Because the author had originally composed this
work for students of Islamic studies and the Arabic language, he arranged
the }:ladiths of the first chapter according to their grammatical sentence
structures to facilitate an understanding of Arabic grammar.

    Zad al-talibln has been a popular book taught in a number of madrasas as
an initial }:ladith work. It has proven to be a means ofbenefit for the students
in that it accustoms them to the memorization of}:ladith, inspires them with
the comprehensive guidance contained within, and provides them with a
collection of }:ladith with which they can mold the hearts by expounding
the virtues and excellences of Islam.

l:fadlth Compilations
The teachings of the Messenger of Allah ~-his utterances, deeds, tacit
approvals-were all well recorded, preserved, and transmitted orally by the
Companions. Though many }:ladiths were recorded in writing during the
lifetime of Allah's Messenger ~, it was only in the second century of Islam
that systematic compilations of }:ladith were produced by the likes of Imam
Malik ibn Anas (d. 193/SoS) and others. Subsequently many other compi-
                                                                                   INTRODUCTION ~ 15

lations appeared, including the $i~ii~ Sitta, or the "Six Authentic Books
of I:Iadith''-$a~'i~ Bukhiir'i, Muslim, Sunan Ab'i Diiwud, Tirmidh'i, Nasii''i,
and Ibn Miija. However, these lengthy compilations proved difficult for lay
Muslims and students oflater generations to encompass and use. The need
arose for l).adlth compilations that covered all aspects of the teachings of
Islam but at the same time were concise and easily accessible.

    One such distinguished compilation was the Ma~iib'i~ al-Sunna (The
Lamps of the Sunna) by 'Allama Baghawl. 'Allama Baghaw1 selected the
l).adiths in his book from the larger and more extensive source collections
that covered a variety of topics, and arranged them accordingly in his own
compilation under specific chapter headings and subsections. Although this
book proved very useful and met the demands of the time, one issue with it
was that, in the interest ofbrevity, he did not mention the chains oftransmis-
sion (isniid) of the l).adiths and the sources they were compiled from.

Mishkiit al-Ma~iib'i~
Some scholars felt the need to revise and edit the Ma~iib'i~ al-Sunna in order
to increase its utility and make it more accessible to the lay person who did
not possess advanced knowledge of the science of l).adlth. Thus, 'Allama
I:Iusayn ibn 'Abdillah ibn Mul).ammad al-T1b1, a great l).adith scholar of
the eight century AH, advised one of his students, Wall al-Dln al-Khatib
al-Tabr1z1 (d. 749l1348), to work on the Ma~iib'i~ al-Sunna and to address
its shortcomings. Tabr1z1 responded to the call ofhis teacher, and his efforts
bore fruit. The improved version of Ma~iib'i~ al-Sunna was completed on
the eve of'Id al-Fitr 737l1336 and was titled Mishkiit al-Ma~iib'i~ (Niche of
the Lamps). Tabr1z1, in addition to citing the references of the narrations
and mentioning the names of the Companions who narrated them, added
1511 l).adiths to the original number of l).adiths in Ma~iib'i~ al-Sunna, thus
raising the total from 4434 to 5945. Tabr1z1 presented his work to his teacher,
who was very pleased. T1b1 wasted no time and wrote a commentary on it
entitled al-Kiishif.

    Mishkiit al-Ma~iib'i~ enjoyed widespread acceptance and approval
throughout the world because of its conciseness and comprehensiveness.
It is still used today as part of the curriculum in the madrasas of the Indian
Subcontinent, South Africa, United Kingdom, USA, and other parts of the
16 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

world. It was from this popular l;ladith compilation that Shaykh 'Ashiq Ilahi
selected all the l;ladiths of Zad al-talib!n.

    In the case ofDarul Uloom Bury, UK, where I studied, it is a requirement
for the students of the second year to memorize all the l;ladiths in Zad al-
talib!n. Unfortunately, I missed the opportunity to memorize them because
I had transferred during my second year to another madrasa in India, where
it was not part of the curriculum. Upon returning, I felt a great sense ofloss.
Subsequently, Allah granted me the ability to work on a translation of it for
my own benefit and that of other students. The first edition was published
in Sha'ban 1417/December 1996, with brief commentary on some of the
narrations, as Provisions for the Seekers. The book attracted significant inter-
est from students and others outside student circles, owing to its short yet
inspiring and diverse selection of l;ladith, which gave the reader a flavor of
the beautiful teachings of the Messenger of Allah ~ and created in them a
thirst to study further books ofl;ladith. However, despite repeated requests
for a second edition, it never made it to the press again-until now.

The Second Edition ofProvisions for the Seekers
My intention for this second edition of Provisions for the Seekers was to add
further commentary, redesign the work in a more comprehensive format,
and cater to a wider readership. All this, by the grace of Allah, now makes
up the second edition of the book before you. Allah wills as He wants, and
He is the best of planners.

    The following changes and additions have been made to this edition:
· For the sake ofsimplicity, the text has been arranged into three individual
chapters: (1) Comprehensive Sayings, (2) Prophesies, and (3) Accounts and
Narratives.
· Commentary has been added to the majority ofl;ladiths, leaving out only
those that were thought to be sufficiently self-explanatory.
· The commentary follows directly under the translation of the l;ladith,
rather than as a footnote or endnote, for more convenient reading.
· The primary references to each l;ladith have been added at the end of
each l;ladith. The detailed reference section in the first edition of this book
no longer remains in this edition. One may consult the Arabic edition of
the work for this if the need arises.
                                                                                    INTRODUCTION ~ 17

· A table of references showing volume and page number of the l).adiths
in the Mishkiit al-Ma~iibib, in two editions of Mirqiit al-mafiitib, and in
Ma:?iihir-e J:Iaq (an Urdu commentary of the Mishkiit), is placed after the
main text to facilitate further research. This table was originally prepared by
Mawlana YusufHajat in the UK (may Allah reward him), with references to
the newer edition of the Mirqiit al-mafiitib being added by myself. The edi-
tions of these books quoted in this work can be found in the bibliography.
· The original order of the l).adiths in the first chapter, which is based on
grammatical sentence structure, has been retained even though this book
is no longer intended only for students of Arabic.
· Much of the elucidation on the l).adiths is from the Mirqiit al-mafiitib by
Mulla 'Ali al-Qari (d. 1014/I6os), which is his commentary on the Mishkiit al-
Ma~iibib. It is considered to be the most comprehensive Arabic commentary
of the Mishkiit, as well as one ofthe most recent. Another commentary used
is that of the author, Shaykh 'Ashiq Ilahi, called Maziid al-riighibin, along
with the great I:Ianbali scholar Ibn Rajah's Jam{ al-'uliim wa '1-bikam, and
a few other works that are mentioned in the bibliography.
· All other commentaries and clarifications are based on the explanations
of my teachers. These are introduced by the letter [A] or incorporated in
brackets within the quoted text, and, as such, unreferenced. May Allah
reward them abundantly. If some inaccuracies have crept into this book
then they are to be ascribed to nothing other than my own inability and
weakness in understanding and retention.

    There has been a lack of English translations of shorter l).adith works,
and English-speaking Muslims can stand to benefit, Allah willing, from
many more. It is an open field to work in for those who were blessed with
the opportunity to sit at the feet of the scholars of l).adith. Through such
blessed gatherings, the student is connected to the Messenger of Allah !®;
through the noble chains of l).adith transmission.

    Finally, I would like to relate that I was fortunate to visit the author of the
book, Shaykh 'Ashiq Ilahi, in the illuminated city of Allah's Messenger !®;
in 2001. My first meeting with him was in the western wing of the Prophet's
Masj id !®;, where it was his habit to perform the congregational prayers. It was
'Isha time and I waited until he had completed his prayer, after which a few
people came forward to ask him questions regarding bajj. He was extremely
18 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

jovial and responded to them with a warm smile on his face. The last time
I had communicated with him was in 1996 by mail to seek permission to
translate Ziid al-tiilibln. He had accepted and then also written a foreword
for the translation. When I finally met him face-to-face in 2001, he quickly
connected my name to my earlier correspondence with him, though he was
an author of hundreds of works, met with so many people day in and day
out, and dealt with different translators and publishers.

    He took me along with him to his house, which was at a distance in
Madina from the Masjid, and insisted that I eat with him. He informed me
of other books that he had been working on. Other guests from Australia
came to visit him during this time, and I eventually left with them back to
the Masjid. That was my first and only personal meeting with him; he passed
away later that year, at the age of So, and was buried in the Baqi' graveyard.
May Allah shower him with mercy, illuminate his grave, and reward him for
the sincerity and na~l~a that he provided to thousands through his works.

    Thus, I present this meager offering to you in following the path of our
shaykhs of the Subcontinent, who spent their lives working on ):ladith and
produced many fine commentaries on the primary ):ladith collections. My
hope is that Allah grant me the ability to walk in their footsteps in working

on the inherited treasures of):ladith from His Messenger Mu):lammad it. in

what remains ofmy life. May Allah bless all my teachers who have connected
me to the Messenger of Allah~ in the science of):ladith, and may He accept
the efforts of all those who assisted in bringing this work to fruition.

    I ask Allah to grant the work success, to enlighten people's hearts with
the sweet words of His Messenger it., and to bless us all with his intercession
in the Hereafter. May Allah shower His infinite blessings and mercy upon
our Master Mu):lammad, his family, and Companions, Amln.

                                                                     ABDUR-RAHMAN IBN YUSUF MANGERA

                                                                       Santa Barbara, California

                                     I Mul;larram 10, 1426 February 19, 2005
   /  d           //

J.Jt;dl ~J JĄj }'~ ~
/           /  /      /
 "*~~ d!JI~
         '

PROVISIONS
   FOR THE
   SEEKERS
          In the name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Mercy Giving.

' c...:./J, , ci1 ~,..J..,...".."'  ~,      y,i  ~~             ~. ·  0f  Jt:f  :&1.J,,,.J.'.'JIJJI          ·J..,...  1;~l'  \~ t _..,  u·:':'t.il

                                    /                        /                                            /                              /
                                         /

                                    e r:~\ ~~.J~ ~~ ~~~\ 1-' ~~ ·r-::~11 ~\; 0_;:;.~//                                 /

All praise is for Allah, who exalted us over all nations with the Message

of [Mul:lammad ~], the one He endowed, from among all of mankind,

with comprehensive speech and pearls of wisdom. May Allah shower

him, his Family, and his Companions with blessings and peace, as long

as the tongues [of mankind) continue to sound, and the pens [of man-

kind) continue to etch, his praise.

To proceed. This is a concise work containing selected sayings of the

venerable intercessor. I have excerpted them from the magnificent work

known as the Niche ofthe Lamps, and have titled the work Provisionsfor

the Seekers from the Speech ofthe Messenger ofthe Lord of the Worlds~

The words of these sayings are few, but their meanings are deep. Anyone

                                                                                                                                         21
22 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

who reads them and memorizes them is illuminated, and anyone who
listens to them and studies them is delighted.

    I have divided the book into two parts-may their benefits come to
pass in both this life and the next. I ask Allah to make this work solely
for the sake of His pleasure, and a means of entry into the Abode of
Bliss. Indeed, His forgiveness is vast, and He is the Possessor oflnfinite
Bounty.
                       J~YI ~~I""

                        PART 1

Comprehensive Sayings, Springs of Wisdom
              & Sound Admonition
 24 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

The Prophet ~ said, "Actions are only according to intentions, and a
 person receives only what he has intended. Therefore, whoever's emigra-
 tion is for Allah and His Messenger, his emigration is [truly] for Allah
and His Messenger. And whoever's emigration is for any worldly gain
or a woman he is to wed, then his emigration is for what he emigrated"

 (Bukhar!, Muslim).
This ):Iadith addresses one of the most important aspects oflslam-sincere intention
 in one's worship. The general meaning of the ):Iadith is that a person should set aright
 his intention at the beginning of every action. The entitlement of reward for an action
 depends on a person's intention for performing that action. If an action is carried out
 with sincerity, it is rewarded by Allah, otherwise it is done in vain. Imam A):Imad ibn
 I:Ianbal said that the fundamentals oflslam are based on three ):Iadiths: this ):Iadith, the
 ):Iadith of 'A'isha ~' "Whoever innovates something reprehensible in this religion of
 ours which does not belong to it, is rejected" ():Iadith 213), and the ):Iadith of Nu'man

 ibn Bashir ~ transmitted by Imam Muslim in his $abll;, "The lawful is clear and the

 unlawful is clear...."
    It has been mentioned that the ):Iadith of intention was narrated regarding a person

 who emigrated from Makka to marry a woman by the name of Umm Qays, who had
 stipulated his emigration. Hence, he became known as Muhajir Umm Qays, or "The
 Łmigrator for Umm Qays:' However, ):Iadith scholars consider this to be an unsubstan-
 tiated opinion and say that the ):Iadith was said as a general exhortation for those who
 were emigrating, and the incident with Umm Qays took place much later.

    Niyya, which means to intend, desire, or will something, is a function of the heart,
 not the tongue. Through niyya, a person distinguishes the nature of the action he is
 to perform (i.e., an obligatory or supererogatory prayer; an optional or make-up fast,
 etc.), as well as its purpose (i.e., spending to show off to others or spending to please
Allah and spread His religion). Scholars have explained the first segment of the ):Iadith,
"Actions are only according to intentions;' as referring to how an action can only be
 considered religiously valid if done with a sound intention. For instance, a person's
fast, which includes abstaining from food, drink, and sexual intercourse from dawn to
 sunset, will only be considered valid if he had intended to fast for the sake of fasting
                                                               COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 25

and not, for instance, because he did not have the time to eat during a busy work day.
The second portion of the J:tadith, "a person receives only what he has intended;' refers
to the reward a person will gain for a soundly intended action. Another explanation of
the two statements is that the first portion refers to the entitlement of reward and the
second serves to emphasize and further clarify the first.

   With regard to intention, an action done purely for Allah's sake is undoubtedly
superior to one that is coupled with a desire to gain something worldly (e.g., a pilgrim
who makes the pilgrimage for Allah's sake but also intends to trade while in Makka [a
permissible action]). However, if the motive for performing an act ofworship is mixed
with ostentation, even to the slightest degree, then the action will not be accepted
by Allah (see also J:tadiths So and 191). Noble scholars such as the Companion Abii
'1-Darda ~and I:Iasan al-Ba~ri and Sa'id ibn al-Musayyib (may Allah be pleased with
them) are of the opinion that actions mixed with ostentation will not be accepted by
Allah the Exalted.

   What happens if an action is started with a pure intention, but the notion of osten-
tation occurs afterwards? If it is a fleeting notion and does not persist in one's heart
then it will not cause any harm. However, ifit is entertained and allowed to rest in one's
heart, then there are two opinions about this. Imam AJ:tmad and I:Iasan al-Ba~ri (may
Allah have mercy on them) have expressed hope that the person will still be rewarded
based on his initial intention in spite of the entry of ostentation while performing the
action. However, Ibn Jarir al-Tabar!, the renown exegete of the early fourth century
AH, explains that it depends on the type of action. For example, if it is a comprehensive
action, such as ~aliit, fasting, or pilgrimage, which requires an initial intention, and if
its prerequisites and integrals are met, then the action is considered complete, then os-
tentation creeping in the middle ofthis action will not harm it. If, however, the action is
not ofthis type but rather a separate action not consisting ofprerequisites and integrals,
such as recitation of the Qur'an, remembrance ofAllah, or teaching, then the intention
will have to remain pure and free from ostentation throughout the action in order to
be valid. Hence, actions of this second category require a renewal of the intention in
order for them to yield reward.

   As for unsought praise a person receives (on some accomplishment), it is not blame-
worthy, even if one feels happiness about it. The Messenger of Allah Jil'1, described this
praise and honor as ''Advanced glad tidings [from Allah] for the believer" (Muslim).

   The scholars have stated that it is recommended that authors begin their works with
this J:tadith (on intention), as have Imam Bukhari and many others. By doing this, the
author reminds himself and the reader to correct their intentions for writing, reading,
and studying the book (!ami' al-'ulum wa '1-bikam, Mirqiit al-mafiitib).

    [A) From this narration, it is also understood that any permissible action, however
26 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

mundane, can be a source of reward for a person if soundly intended. For instance,
if a person eats, drinks, sleeps, or exercises, and intends that he is undertaking these
essential activities to remain healthy and active to worship Allah, each one of these
activities will be a source of reward for him and thus blessed.

~YI~I'·

NOMINAL SENTENCES

1. The Religion (Islam) is to act with sincerity (Muslim).

The Arabic word al-na~il;a, used in the J:tadith above, is a comprehensive and unique
term and is difficult to translate precisely into English. Even in Arabic, it does not have
a synonym. Therefore, the expression "to act with sincerity" has been adopted here as a
broad explanation for the Arabic word. Other meanings could be-giving good advice,
directing toward good, acting sincerely or honestly, or being benevolent and desiring
good (see Lane, Arabic English Lexicon).

   The remainder ofthe J:tadith, as narrated by Imam Muslim on the authority ofTamlm
al-Darl ~,is: "We inquired from the Messenger of Allah, 'Toward whom?' He replied,
'For Allah, His Book, His Messenger, the leaders of the Muslims, and the common
people"' (Muslim). The J:tadith makes clear that one of the most important aspects
of true faith is to give good counsel, to wish well, and to act toward everything with
honesty and sincerity.

   This is further explained as follows: In relation to Allah, "sincerity" means to have
faith in His essence and attributes, to obey His each and every command, to express
gratitude for His blessings, and to fulfill His rights of Lordship in every possible way.
In terms of the Book of Allah, it means to fulfill its rights by accepting it as the word
of Allah, honoring it and reciting it correctly, and practicing its injunctions. For the
Messenger of Allah ~, it means to fulfill his rights, confirm that he is the Messenger of
Allah, practice his Sunna, honor him and his family, and hold everything that he has
said to be true. For the leaders of the Muslims, it means to assist them in virtue, obey
them and exhort others to do the same, remind them of their responsibilities and cor-
rect them in a polite, reformative, and wise manner. The same applies for the scholars
oflslam. For the masses, it is to guide them aright and prevent them from wrong, assist
                                                               COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 27

them in their needs and support them, protect them from harm, and deal with them
in the best possible manner.

   Similarly, as regards every other aspect of life, the religious obligation of na§!/:za is
fulfilled by performing everything in the most beneficial and correct manner possible.
(!ami' al-'ulum wa '1-l:zikam, Mirqat al-mafatl/:z)

                                                    ~;~\0 ~t :~itll,.. (")

2. Supplication is the essence of worship (Bukharl).

Supplication (du'a') has been called the essence of worship for two main reasons. First,
by supplicating to Allah, a person fulfills his obligation of calling on Allah, which is
understood from the verse "And your Lord says, 'Call on Me, I will answer you (your
prayer)"' (Qur'an 40:6o). This is worship in its purest form. Second, by invoking Allah,
one realizes that only He can fulfill one's needs. The servant who calls upon his Lord
abandons hope in everything else and turns his full attention to Allah, humbling himself
in front of Him. This is the essence of worship. Another desired result of worship is
to attain reward from Allah. Because there is such great reward in supplication, it has
been called the essence of worship. (Mazad al-raghib!n 7)

3. A person will be with whom he loves (Bukhar!, Muslim).

This statement ofthe Messenger of Allah$ was in response to someone who came and
inquired, "0 Messenger of Allah, what do you say about someone who loves a group of
people, but is unable to join them?" What is meant by "a group of people" is the learned
or righteous people, and what is meant by, "was unable to join them;' is a person who
was unable to gain their company or achieve the same status as them in knowledge
and action. To this the Messenger of Allah ~ replied, "A person will be with whom he
loves;' i.e., he will be gathered with them on the Day of Judgment. Allah Most High
says, "Whosoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, they will be with those unto whom
Allah has shown favor, ofthe Prophets and the saints and the martyrs and the righteous.
The best of company are they" (Qur'an 4:69-70).

   This Q.ad!th could also be applied more generally to those who aspire to be with evil
people and sinners and secretly admire their actions, even though they may not have
perpetrated those evil actions themselves. They will be gathered with the sinners on
the Day of Judgment (Mirqat al-mafatl/:z 8:740).
28 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

4· Calmness and patient deliberation is from Allah and haste is from
Satan (Tirmidhl).

This ]:ladlth refers to everyday activities and not to acts of worship. A person is en-
couraged to conduct his daily activities with calmness and patience, as acting in haste
often leads to spoiling one's actions. However, when it comes to worship, a person is
encouraged to hasten toward good, i.e., embark upon good acts with determination
and eagerness, and then complete them with calmness, concentration, and devotion
(Mirqat al-mafat"ib 8:786). [A] For example, it is disliked for one to run to join the
prayer, but it is commendable to perform the ablution (wwju') at home and set out
for the prayer early.

                                 i~~~~~~,                    (o  )
                                                         ,,

s. Gatherings are to be kept in confidence (Abu Dawud).

What a person hears or sees in a meeting must be kept confidential and should not
be disclosed to others. However, as the remainder of the narration states, three things
are exempted from this. These are plans to murder, plans to rape a woman, or plans to
usurp someone's wealth (Mazad al-raghibfn 8). See also ]:ladlth 17·

                               0~~~; j~~ :t;;JI (1)

                                                                   ,,

6. Modesty is a branch of faith (Bukharf, Muslim).

I:Iad!th narrations mention that there are more than seventy branches of faith. Ofthese,
baya' (modesty, bashfulness, shyness) is specifically mentioned, affirming it as one of
the most important branches.lfaya' is an important means of restraining oneself from
sin, and restraint from sin is one of the most important obligations of faith.

   The type of baya' referred to in this ]:lad!th is the modesty that comes from faith and
not the natural shyness in a person. It has been explained by the saying, "Your Lord to
not find you from where He has prohibited you:' which is also part of ibsan, or "per-
fection of faith'' (for the meaning of ibsan, see chapter 3, ]:lad!th 1; for branches of faith,
see Mirqat al-majatfb 1:141).

   'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud ~relates that one day the Messenger of Allah !lf1> said, "Be shy
of Allah Most High as much as is His due:' The Companions present said, "All praise to
                                                                COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 29

Allah, we are shy of Him:' The Messenger ~ said, "That is not the point. Whoever is shy
of Allah as much as is His due, he should protect his head and that which it comprises
[i.e., mind, mouth, ears], his stomach and that which is adjoining it [i.e., preserve it
from unlawful wealth and protect the private parts from the unlawful], and he should
remember death and that which is to come after it; and whoever desires the Hereafter
should abandon the adornments of this world. Whoever fulfills these duties has been
shy of Allah as much as is His due" (Abmad).

7. Alcohol constitutes many sins (Raz!n).

A narration in Sunan al-Bayhaq! from 'Abdullah Ibn 'Umar ~ states, "Alcohol is the
mother of all obscenities and the gravest of sins. Whoever consumes alcohol abandons
prayer and commits adultery with his mother and with his paternal and maternal
aunts."

   There is a saying that a person was once called to prostrate before an idol, but refused.
He was then asked to commit murder, but refused. He was then invited to commit
adultery, but refused. However, when he was offered alcohol he accepted and he then
committed all of the other sins (MirqiU al-mafat!b 9:65).

                        ~~~WI~ ~~ ~ ~J_j\ (A)

8. A believer is simple and noble and a transgressor is deceitful and
ignoble (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhl).

This ]:ladith describes the contrast between two types of people. The first type is a true
believer who shuns the affairs ofthis world and occupies himselfwith making provisions
for the next world. At times, this type of person may be deceived in his worldly affairs,
not out ofignorance, but because ofhis generous and noble character and lack ofconcern
for the material objects of this world, and he is free of cynicism toward others.

   The second type of person is a transgressor or an unrighteous person who is well
acquainted with the methods of deception. He never allows himself to be deceived, but
continually deceives others. He is ungenerous in his nature. This type of person has
been characterized by the Messenger Ji1, as ignoble and his nature contrary to that of a
true believer (Mirqat al-mafat!b 8:813, Mazad al-raghib!n w).
30 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                           t ,.. ,9-
                                       r0  ,. ,  0
                                       ~~~ ~ .;;L;.il; ~~ ( 1\)

9. Oppression will be darknesses on the Day of Judgment (Bukhari).

 On the other hand, righteous deeds will be a source of light on the Day of Judgment.
"Darknesses" could also be a symbolic reference to the hardships and torments of the
 Day of Judgment (Mirqat al-mafati~ 8:846). :?ulm (lit., putting a thing in a place not
 its own, "oppression" or "wrongdoing") can be upon oneself-the worst of which is
 ascribing partners with Allah (shirk), followed by the major and minor sins. Or it can
 be related to others-for instance, wrongfully taking another's honor, life, or property
 (Jam{ al-'ulum wa 'l-~ikam 334).

10. The world is a prison for the believer and a paradise for the unbe-
liever (Muslim, Tirmidhi).

This world is a prison for the believer in comparison to the bounties and rewards pre-
pared for him in the next world, and is a paradise for an unbeliever in comparison to
the chastisement and punishment awaiting him in the next world. In the same way, a
true believer's desire is to leave this world and meet Allah (hence, a prison), whereas an
unbeliever's desire is to live in this world forever (hence, a paradise). Fu<,layl ibn 'Iya<,l
(d. 187/803) said, "Whoever forgoes the pleasures and desires ofthe world is in a prison.
As for the one who does not abandon them, what type of prison is he in?" (Mirqat al-
mafati~ 9?, Mazad al-raghibin n).

                      jL:_J1 j1:} ?- ~\ 4\ (")

n. The upper [giving] hand is superior to the lower [taking] hand

(Bukhari, Muslim).

[A] To be in the position of giving something to someone is superior to taking from
someone.

12. Purity is half of faith (Muslim).
                                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 31

Some scholars have taken iman (faith) to mean prayer (~a/at) in this context. Hence,
purity becomes halfofprayer because it is the most important prerequisite ofthe prayer.
Another explanation is that just as entering into faith eliminates one's major and minor
sins, the performing of ablution (ww:fu') eliminates one's minor sins (Mirqat al-mafatib
2:6). [A] This Q.adith can also be taken as a general exhortation toward purity in all one's
states and actions. Furthermore, it is important to note that purity (tahara) is differ-
ent from cleanliness (na:;:afa). The former means to be free from physical impurities
(najasa) like blood, urine, or stool, and from the state of ritual impurity (badath and
janaba), while the latter means to appear outwardly clean. Though this Q.adith speaks
of purity in particular, Muslims ought to be both pure and clean, as was the practice
of Allah's Messenger i!lll.

13. Bells are the flutes of Satan (Muslim).

This Q.adith stems from the idea that their ringing distracts a person's attention from
the remembrance of Allah. The word mazamir, "flutes;' has been used here in the
plural to relate to the incessant ringing sound of a bell (Mirqat al-mafatib 7:446). See
also Q.adlth 133.

14. The one who eats and is thankful is like the one who fasts and is
patient (Tirmidhi, Darimi).

The one who eats is "thankful" in that he begins with the Name of Allah [Bismi 'Llah]
and ends with praise of Him [Al-bamdu li 'Llah]. The one who fasts is "patient" in that
he abstains from doing anything that breaks the fast. The point of similarity between
the two is that both acts are deserving of reward, even though the reward ofthe fasting
person is surely greater (Mirqat al-mafatib 8:40).

        ~~J~-:s;()l:J4&~tjl ('o)

        /  /  /  /

15. The one who initiates the saliim is free of pride (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-

iman).
32 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                                           ~ ;;~ ....-o~,.o -'  ,.,
(\i) ~v:J .,U~
                                              ,..p. _....                   .!.liy::JI

                                              ;;L,.;_:,;

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /

16. The tooth-stick purifies the mouth and pleases the Lord (Bukhari

without a chain [ta'liqan], Nasa'i, Darimi).

17. Backbiting is worse than unlawful intercourse (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-

iman).

This narration continues with the Companions asking the Messenger of Allah ~ why
backbiting is more severe. Allah's Messenger ~ replied that the person who fornicates
is forgiven by Allah if he sincerely repents, but the one who backbites is not forgiven
until the person he transgressed against forgives him.

   Another reason for this is that unlawful intercourse is normally recognized by the
fornicator as a serious sin; hence, there is a greater chance of him turning to Allah and
repenting. On the other hand, a person who backbites does not normally realize the
seriousness of his sin and takes it lightly; hence, he does not stop and repent (Mirqat
al-mafati~ 8:610). For definition of backbiting, see chapter 3, l_J.adith 30.

18. The Qur'iin will either be evidence for you or against you (Muslim).

The Qur'an will be "evidence" for one [on the Day of Judgment] if he acts upon its
commandments. Otherwise, it will be a proof against him (Mirqat al-mafati~ 2:9). It is
related from 'Abdullah ibn Mas'iid ~ that the Qur'an will appear on the Day of Judg-
ment and will intercede for the one who read it and will then guide him into Paradise.
On the contrary, the Qur'an will bear witness against the one who neglected it and will
then drive him into the Hellfire (!ami' al-'u/Um wa '1-~ikam 328).

19. Women are the snares of Satan (Razin).

[A] This is confirmed by another l_J.adith in $a~i~ al-Bukhari and Muslim in which the
Messenger of Allah~ said, "I have not left behind me any trial (fitna) more harmful to
                                                   COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 33

men than women:' The essence of the narration is that Satan often employs women as a
lure for men, time and time again, leading to the committal ofsinful acts. However, this
is not to say that women are inherently evil, or that they are the sole cause of men's sins,
or that men have been absolved from the evil prevalent in society. Rather, the narration
alludes to the natural attraction men possess for women, by which Satan lures them into
sin. This is why men have been commanded to lower their gazes and why women have
been commanded to abide by a modest dress code. These are safety measures for both
sexes-if a man does not lower his gaze, the modest dress of women will prevent him
from realizing any of his sinful behavior, and vice versa. The use of women as snares
is an undeniable fact that can be observed today in, among other places, the advertis-
ing industry. Of course, men who use women for commercial gain-as stewardesses,
models, pornographers, and prostitutes, for instance-are as accursed, perhaps even
more than the women whom they exploit. People who clamor about women's abuse
and strive to eradicate it ought to turn their attention to this degradation of women,
which has doubtlessly led to the objectification ofwomen and high incidences of sexual
harassment, domestic assault, and other crimes related to women's abuse. And to Allah
is our complaint.

                             j~~~ ~..;11~~8\ (r·)

20. One who repents from sin is like one who has no sin (Ibn Maja,

Tabarani, Al-Mu'jam al-kabfr).
This Q.adith refers to one who repents sincerely. The similarity between the two people
is in terms of accountability. Just as the person who did not commit any sins does not
have to give account, the one who has repented will no longer have to give account for
the sins he repented from. As for who is the better of the two, there is a difference of
opinion among the scholars. The superior view, according to Mulla 'Ali al-Qari, is in
favor of the one who did not sin at all, since his state is closer to that of the prophets
and angels (upon them be peace). And Allah knows best (Mirqat al-mafatlb 5:196).

21. Moderation in spending is half of [one's] sustenance, friendliness
34 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

toward people is half of [one's] intelligence, and asking good questions
is half of [one's) knowledge (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-lman).

Here, "Moderation in spending..." is best understood by the verse ofthe Qur'an: "Those
who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not miserly, but hold a just balance
between the two" (Qur'an 25:67). [The income a person receives is mostly not in one's
control, as opposed to the spending ofwhat one possesses, which is nearly always in his
control. Hence, regulating what one spends of his wealth can provide half the answer
to stability in one's livelihood.] "Friendliness toward people ..." means that a person's
intelligence is perfected through interaction with others, in that the collaboration of
two minds is better than one. And "Asking good questions is half of one's knowledge"
because knowledge of a particular issue only becomes complete by asking the appro-
priate questions (MirqiU al-mafattb 8:795). [A] Also, fully thinking through a question
before seeking an answer provides half the answer to the questioner, as opposed to
random questioning.

LAI~~o,&.... t0:..... ;):wl0 j.~_r0 ..ll~,.... ~~-'o~,"0"' 1;:;~,..1. o,.... (n)

                                                   ~~~~_,

22. The intelligent one is he who has subdued his lower self and who
has worked for what comes after death, and the stupid one is he who
has put his lower selfin pursuance ofits desires and who has vain hopes
about Allah (Tirmidhl, Ibn Maja).

The person who subdues his lower self is that person who renders himself in complete
obedience to the commands of Allah. In this parable, the one who carries vain hopes
about Allah is the one who thinks, "My Lord is Most Generous and Merciful;' and
forgets that Allah has also said, "0 man! What has seduced you from your Lord, Most
Beneficent?" (Qur'an 82:6). Also, "Tell my servants that I am indeed the Oft-Forgiving,
Most Merciful, and that My chastisement will be indeed the most grievous chastisement"
(Qur'an 15:49) (Mirqat al-mafatlb 9:142). [A] The soul is like a horse which would take
its own course when without reigns; however, when subjugated by them it follows. In
this regard 'Allama Bii~ayri provides a beautiful parable:

   The self is like a child who if you let alone would grow up
       In love of suckling, but if you wean it would be weaned.
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 35

Then keep its desires in check and beware that it does not overpower you.
   Verily lust when it overpowers humiliates or destroys
                                                                              (Qa~fda Burda).

.,.... ;. ,....o -:;;  ,.... ~ ,.....o
UJ~'lj UJ4'1 ~~ '1~ UJt ~~~ (rr) -' ,.....0 .,....

23. The believer is one who is sociable [with others], and there is no
good in one who is not sociable [with others] nor in one who is not met
sociably [by them] (Mustadrak, Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-fman).

This J:!adith underscores the importance of socialization among Muslims in order to
form bonds of unity. Allah says, ''And hold fast, all together, to the rope ofAllah, and be
not divided among yourselves; and remember with gratitude Allah's favor on you; for
you were enemies and He joined your hearts in love, so that by His grace you became
brethren ..." (Qur'an 3:103). [A] Meeting with others in a sociable manner encourages
others to do the same and also engenders within the community feelings oflove and
warmth.

24. Songs make hypocrisy grow in the heart just as water makes crops
grow (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-lman).

Listening to [instrumental] music is clearly prohibited in Islam. Allah says, ''And of
mankind is he who pays for mere pastime of discourse, that he may mislead from
Allah's way without knowledge, and makes it the butt of mockery. For such there is a
humiliating punishment" (Qur'an 31:6). Many of the great exegetes of the Qur'an, such
as 'Abdullah ibn Mas'iid, Ibn 'Abbas, Ibn 'Umar ~. 'Ikrima, Maymiin ibn Mahran, and
MakJ:!iil state that this verse directly refers to singing. Imam Tirmidhi has narrated on the
authority of'Ali ~that the Messenger ofAllah$ said, "When my nation adopts fifteen
traits, trials will descend upon them-among these traits are taking to songstresses and
musical instruments" (Qurtubi, Al-Jami' li abkam al-Quran 14:51-53).

   In another verse, Allah Most High says, ''And excite from them whom you can with
your voice; make assaults on them with your cavalry and your infantry; mutually share
with them wealth and children; and make promises to them. But Satan promises them
nothing but deceit" (Qur'an 17:64). The great exegete Mujahid states that the reference
to a satanic voice in this verse refers to singing, the flute, and entertainment. Ibn 'Abbas
36 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

AI< states that this verse refers to all voices which invite toward disobedience (Al-fiimi'
li a~kiim al-Quran 10:288). In a i:J.adith, the Messenger of Allah iiJ!I said, "There will be
people in my nation who will seek to make lawful fornication, silk, intoxicants, and
musical instruments" (Bukhari).

   Therefore, Imam Nawawi concludes in his Rawt;fa, "Singing using only one's voice is
as disliked (makruh) as is listening to it. More strongly disliked is to listen to the sing-
ing of a marriageable woman (ajnabiyya). Singing with the accompaniment of musical
instruments-the sign of those who are taken to drinking liquor-like the lute ('ud),
mandolin (tanbur), cymbal (sanj), and all stringed instruments (ma'iizif) is prohibited
(~ariim). Likewise, listening to it is also prohibited" (Mirqat al-mafat!~ 8:558-559). And
'Allama I:Ia~kafi, the great Syrian jurist, states in his compendium on legal rulings, ''As
for listening to musical instruments ... it is prohibited and an act of disobedience.... If
someone happens to hear it accidentally, then there is no sin on him. He must, however,
do all he can to avoid it, since it has been narrated that the Messenger of Allah ilJ!. inserted
his fingers into his ears when he heard it" (Al-Durr al-mukhtiir 5:223).

    [A] There are several rigorously authenticated i:J.adiths on the unlawfulness of musi-
cal instruments, with the exception of the duff, a one-sided small drum, whose use the
Messenger of Allah iiJ!I permitted in announcing weddings (Tirmidhi). It is thus permit-
ted, as mentioned by Ibn I:Iajar al-Makki al-Haytami and others, to use such drums
to announce marriages and consummation ceremonies, and some scholars have also
included occasions such as a circumcision, 'Id, the return from a journey, and the happy
gatherings offriends. However, Mulla 'Ali al-Qari, quoting the great Egyptian jurist, Ibn
a!- Humam, clarifies that such drums should not include jingling discs (i.e., tambourines),
as they are not permitted (Mirqiit al-mafiit!~ 6:301, 304). The i:J.ad!th master Ibn I:Iajar
a!-'Asqalanl has also defined a duffas a one sided drum without discs, and explains that
the tambourine is called a muzhir (Fat~ al-Bar!1:694). The songs prohibited in the texts
above have been explained as those accompanied by musical instrument other than a
duff, or those containing lewd words or ideas, or any such unlawful content. However,
songs or nash!ds in praise of Allah or His Messenger~ or other non-sinful themes that
are free of musical instruments cannot be considered unlawful.

25. Traders will be gathered on the Day of Judgement as transgressors,
except those who feared Allah, were righteous [in their oaths], and
spoke the truth (Tirmidh!, Ibn Miija, Diiriml).

The reason for the generalization in the i:J.ad!th concerning traders is that they are often
                                                   COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 37

deceitful and dishonest in promoting their merchandise. Therefore, the Messenger of
Allah ~ warned them that they would be raised as transgressors. He then excluded
those who fear Allah in their dealings and speak the truth (Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 6:42) [A]
and said that they would be blessed with the company of the prophets (upon them be
peace) and martyrs (see the next l,ladith). Traders includes all types of business men
and brokers.

,.                           /0 ,.                                8\ (n)
1j+~l(      ~ -:'-'.1.~JIJ'  ~'·"·':~II~~--~~ ' \'1   ·'.J~I

         J                                           (JJ
.r: .~.                                                       fo

26. A truthful and trustworthy trader will be in the company of the
prophets, the very truthful, and the martyrs (Tirmidhr, Darimf, Daraqutnf).

A trader will either be gathered with these blessed people on the Day of Judgment or
will be with them in Paradise (Mirqat al-mafatf~ 6:41).

27. The signs of a hypocrite are three: when he speaks he lies, when he
makes a promises he breaks it, and when he is trusted he betrays the
trust (Bukhiirf, Muslim).

One meaning of this l,ladith is that a person in whom these signs are found is a hypo-
crite (muna.fiq) toward the person he has wronged. He can not be called a hypocrite
in religion since he is not concealing unbelief; however, his actions resemble those of
a true hypocrite.

   Another explanation is that hypocrisy (nifiiq-outwardly showing something differ-
ent from what one feels or believes inwardly) is of two types: that which is related to
belief(the greater and true hypocrisy) and that which is in action (the lesser hypocrisy).
'AlHima Khattabi, the great l,ladith scholar ofthe fourth century AH, states that the signs
mentioned in this l,ladith refer to the latter-a person in whom these are found will be
considered a hypocrite in action and not a hypocrite in belief. Yet another explanation
is that these are the signs ofthe true hypocrite and the continuous performance ofthese
sins could eventually lead a person to hypocrisy of faith.

  "[... ]he breaks it" means a person who has resolve from the outset to not fulfill the
promise he is making, or one who initially makes a sincere promise then breaks it
without any valid reason (Dalfl al-fali~fn 5:159, Mirqat al-mafatr~ 1:226, !ami' al-'ulUm
wa '1-~ikam 634, 640).
 38 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

28. The major sins are worshipping others besides Allah, disobeying
parents, killing a human being [unlawfully], and the immersing oath

 (Bukharl, Muslim).
An "immersing oath" is when a person takes an oath by Allah regarding a past event that
 did or did not occur while knowing the contrary to be true. This whelms the person in
 sin, then submerges him into the Hellfire-hence, called an "immersing oath" (Mirqat
 al-mafatl~ 1:220).

29. Righteousness is good character, and sin is what causes uneasiness
in your heart and what you dislike others to become aware of (Muslim,

 Tirmidhl).
"Good character" has been used here in the complete sense, encompassing all good
 acts of obedience toward the Creator and His creation. Some have explained it to be
 those actions in which the heart of a pious person feels comfortable. For a God-fear-
 ing person, two signs make it clear whether an action is one of sin or not. The first is
 that the action creates unease in the heart, and the other is that he dislikes others to
 become aware of it. This does not apply to anyone except one who has returned to his
 innate purity (fitra) and whose heart has opened up to complete submission (islam)
 (Mirqiit al-mafati~ 8:803-804). The one who is drowned in sin is not concerned with
 what others think.

    Furthermore, this l).ad!th is specifically speaking about issues in which a clear religious
 ruling cannot be found in the sacred sources oflslamic law (Mazad al-raghib!n 16) [A]
 or the ruling is unknown to the person.

30. All created beings are Allah's dependants, and the most beloved
of creation to Allah is the one who is good to His dependants (Bayhaql,

 Shu'ab al-lman).
"Allah's dependants" means His creation. It has also been related, "The best ofyou is the
 one who is the most beneficial to people" (Mirqat al-mafatl~ 8=731).
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 39

               ~~j ~L.J ~ 5~1 ~ ~ 2·~~~ (r,)

31. A [true] Muslim is he from whose tongue and hand other believers
remain safe (Bukhari, Muslim).

32. And a [true] believer is he whom people trust with their lives and
possessions (Tirmidhi).

33· And a [true] warrior is one who exerts himself in obedience to Allah

(A(lmad, Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-iman).
[A] "Exerting oneself in obedience to Allah" is considered the greater jihad, which
includes within it the lesser jihad-that is, fighting in the path of Allah. Hence, there
is no conflict in this ]:ladith with the lesser form of jihad. It is included in this ]:ladith
along with other struggles like refraining from everything Allah has prohibited, fulfilling
everything Allah has commanded, and doing one's best to procure His pleasure. The true
warrior is, therefore, the one who is most obedient to Allah in all aspects of his faith.

34. And a [true] emigrant is he who abandons all wrongs and sins

(A(lmad, Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-iman).
This is because it is more difficult to completely abstain from sins than to emigrate
from one place to another, or because the sole purpose of emigrating is to facilitate the
worship of Allah (Mirqat al-majatf(l 1:199, Mazad al-raghibfn 18).

                  ~~ · ...?'~~ u1,-::. ~.~~·~.) r·../; ~~ u1,-::. Z.J. \ (ro)

35. The burden of proof is on the accuser and swearing the oath is on
the one accused (Bayhaqi).
 40 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

 Imam Nawawi states that this Q.adith constitutes one very important principle oflslamic
 law, which is that the accuser, plaintiff, or claimant is burdened with providing proof to
 back his claim. If he is unable to do this then an oath will be required from the defendant
 (Mirqat al-majiUf/:!7:326).

                                                             ~\)~~

36. A believer is a mirror for a believer, and a believer is the brother of
a believer; he safeguards him from destruction and protects him in his
absence (Abu Dawud, Tirmidh!, Bukhari, Al-Adab al-mufrad).

"Protects him in his absence" means that he preserves his respect, honor, and rights in
 front of others in his absence (Mirqat al-majatl/:!8:720).

37. Believers are like a single person; if his eye is in pain his whole body
pains, and if his head is in pain his whole body pains (Muslim).

"Like a single person;' means like the various limbs of a person, as believers all share
 the same faith (Mirqat al-mafatf/:l8:68s).

38. Travelling involves a degree of punishment; it deprives one of his
sleep, food, and drink. Therefore, when one has accomplished his
purpose at his destination, he should hurry back to his family (Bukharf,

Muslim).
Khanabi states that this Q.adith encourages residency [over continuous travel], so that
                                                               COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~:::;:::q 41

the Friday and other congregational prayers are not missed (which are not obligatory
in congregation for a traveler), and so that the rights of family and relatives can be
fulfilled (Mirqat al-mafatrb 7:450).

                 ANOTHER FORM OF NOMINAL SENTENCES

39· The return from battle is like the battle itself [in reward] (Abu

Dawud).
This is because the warrior is returning to rest, regain his strength, and see to the needs

of his family, with an intention to return to battle if needed (Mirqat al-mafattb 7:402).

40. On a journey, the leader ofthe group is their servant (Ibn Maja, Bayhaql,

Shu'ab al-iman).
This means that the person who has been elected the leader of the group is responsible
for the rest ofthem and should see to their interests. It could also mean that the person
from among them who [voluntarily] attends to their needs and serves them, deserves
to be their leader, even though he may not be of similar status to them in some aspects
(Mirqat al-mafattb 7:465).

41. To seek sacred knowledge is an obligation on every Muslim (Ibn

Maja).
This Q.ad!th refers to the acquisition of religious knowledge. It is incumbent (jarr;l 'ayn)
upon every Muslim to seek as much knowledge as will allow him to fulfill his religious
obligations. For example, a Muslim must know (ma'rifa) who his Creator is, he must
42 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

have knowledge of His oneness (wabdaniyya) and of the prophethood of His mes-
sengers, and he must know the way to pray, fast, etc. Higher levels of knowledge, such
as the knowledge required to issue formal legal opinions (jatawa) [or explain deeper
meanings of the Qur'an or J:!adith], are not obligatory upon each Muslim. Rather, this
is a communal obligation (jarrj kifaya) (Mirqat al-mafat!b 1:477), [A] which means it is
necessary upon every community to have access to scholars who can provide guidance
in such advanced issues.

   /0     ,.  ,..,

J~\1~ ~j;1 J~\ (n)

/      /

42. The most truthful dreams are [seen] just before dawn (Tirmidhi).

This can be attributed to the fact that just prior to dawn, and after a night of rest, a
person's mind is normally calm. This time is also marked by the descent of the angels,
who come to witness those making the morning prayer (Mirqat al-mafat!b 8:411).

43. The best among you is he who learns the Qur'an and teaches it

(Bukhari).

44. The most beloved actions in the sight of Allah are the regular ones,
even if they amount to little in quantity (Bukhar!, Muslim).

The word "actions" refers to set portions ofsupererogatory (nafl) prayers, Qur'an recita-
tion, or dhikr litanies (awrad), among other optional acts of worship, which a person
takes upon himself to fulfill on a regular basis (Mirqat al-mafat!b }:315-316).

45. Delay in the repayment of debt by a wealthy person is a form of
oppression (Bukhar!, Muslim).
                            COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 43

                            ~ ~ ~J /'~·~;·'-                ~~~~~~  'd\ffi)

                                                            ?' .

46. Your love for something blinds and deafens (Abii Dawiid, A~mad).

Love "blinds" you from seeing the defects of the object of your love and "deafens" you
from hearing criticism of it (Mirqat al-majaa~ 8:644).

47. What is little but sufficient is better than that which is abundant but
causes heedlessness (Ibn Ifibban).

48. To seek lawful earnings is an obligatory duty following other obliga-
tory duties (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-iman).

Earning a living is only obligatory upon those who must support themselves and their
dependants and not upon those under the responsibility of someone else. [For example,
a woman who is under the protection of her father or her husband is not obligated to
earn.] This obligation is not ofthe same status as the primary obligations of prayer, fast-
ing, etc., which are considered individual obligations (janj 'ayn) upon every Muslim
and of higher importance (Mirqat al-majaa~ 6:31).

49. Love of this world is the origin of all sin (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-lman).

                            ? ,.,..  o _j. o""' "",. ,..-_  (o·) J. _., o""
                            w\,;.1.1..5 / ·· 0i oi.;:.ll J..a9i /.
                            ~~ /

so. The most virtuous charity is that you satisfy a hungry stomach

(Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-iman).

Kabid literally means liver. This includes feeding a hungry person-Muslim or non-
Muslim-or an animal (Mirqat al-majaa~ 4:434).
44 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

51. Two greedy people are never satiated: one who is greedy for knowl-
edge can never get enough of it, and one who is greedy for worldly pos-
sessions can never get enough of them (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-lman).

52. The most virtuous jihad is when one speaks a word of truth before
an unjust ruler (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).

This is because the person who speaks the truth in front of a tyrant ruler places himself
in a dangerous position, just as a warrior does in battle. The former has been consid-
ered superior in that if a ruler is stopped from tyranny, then the benefits of that may
reach a far larger group of people in comparison to killing unbelievers in battle (Mirqat
al-mafatib 7:281).

53. A morning or an evening spent in the path of Allah is more superior
than the world and whatever it contains (Bukharl, Muslim).

This l_ladith has been explained in two ways. One is that the blessings and rewards
gained from a morning or evening spent in the path of Allah are eternal, whereas the
goods of this world are transient. The second explanation is that the rewards gained
from spending time for Allah are much greater than the rewards of a person giving
away in charity the equivalent of the whole world, had he possessed so much (Mirqat
al-mafatib 7:356).

54. A single jurist is more severe on Satan than a thousand worshippers

(Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 45

A jurist, in comparison to a worshipper, can more easily recognize the evil ploys ofSatan,
and can make people aware of Satan's deceits and enjoin the people to do good. On
the other hand, an ordinary worshipper more easily gets caught up in Satan's trickery
because he is completely unaware of it (Mirqat al-mafatib 1:476).

55. Glad tidings are for him who finds abundant invocations for forgive-
ness recorded in his book of deeds (Ibn Maja).

This l,ladith refers to the sincere invocations made by a believer for forgiveness that are
accepted by Allah. They will be presented to the believer on the Day of Judgment and
will be a source of blessing and happiness for him (Mirqat al-mafat'ib 5:189).

56. The pleasure of Allah is in the pleasure of the father, and the dis-
pleasure of Allah is in the displeasure of the father (Tirmidhi).

        i f'!;:'_/;;'~~;~\0   ~ <.....  _-9.:_,
(ov) r-"; c..D'..... 'l;:....t.Wl0l ./_ _,'
                             -;::::     ...y>"
// .) i f ' // y ...y>"
'· / ~

57. The right of an elder brother over the younger ones is like the right
of the father over his children (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-iman).

58. The children of Adam are all profuse wrongdoers, but the best of
profuse wrongdoers are those who repent (Tirmidhi).

Only the prophets and messengers of Allah (upon them be peace) are infallible
(ma~umim) and are excluded from this (MirqiU al-mafatib 5:172). [A] Otherwise all
humans have a potential to sin (but see l,ladith 20 above).
 46 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

59. How many there are who fast but do not gain anything from it but
hunger, and how many there are who pass the night standing in prayer
but do not gain anything from it but sleeplessness (Darimi).

This }Jadith is a commentary on those who fast without seeking reward from Allah or
 who do not abstain from committing sins, even though the minimal obligation is fulfilled
 by such a fast. As for those who stand for lengthy vigils at night, their motive may be
 to show off, in which case no reward would be gained. Likewise is the case with all acts
 of worship-sincerity (ikhla~) is essential in all of them (Mirqat al-mafatlb 4:510). See
 also }Jadith of intention above.

6o. Of the excellence of one's Islam is that he leaves that which does
not concern him (Tirmidhl, Abmad).

The "excellence of one's Islam" is determined by his becoming a complete Muslim.
"Leaving that which does not concern'' a person refers to all nonessential actions and
 statements. A person should constantly be occupied with fulfilling the commands of
Allah, and should leave everything that does not obtain the pleasure of Allah and that
 is not essential for this world or for the Hereafter. One's time should be occupied in
 striving for perfection in acts ofworship and in seeking sacred knowledge. This is what
will bring one endless bliss and salvation in the Hereafter (Mirqat al-mafatlb 8:585).

61. Verily each ofyou is a shepherd, and each ofyou will be questioned
[on the Day ofJudgment] regarding his sheep (Bukharl, Muslim).

The }Jadith continues with: "therefore, the leader of a people is responsible and will be
questioned concerning his responsibility; a man is responsible for [the welfare of] his
household and will be questioned concerning his family; a woman is responsible for
 [safeguarding the sanctity of] her husband's house and will be questioned concerning
her responsibility in that. .. :·
                                                COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 47

   The Messenger iilJ!. commanded that those who are entrusted with the affairs ofothers
exercise due diligence in meeting that responsibility. For example, a leader must establish
the laws of Allah in the land he rules over and must offer protection and security to his
subjects. A man must spend what he earns to provide for his family and he must also
oversee their affairs. A woman in her husband's home must work in the best interest of
his affairs and prepare for his visitors, among other things (Mirqiit al-mafatib 7:264).

62. The most beloved of places in the sight of Allah are the masjids,
and the most disliked of places in the sight of Allah are the markets

(Muslim).
This is because masjids are those places where one draws closer to Allah, and markets
are those places where the influences of Satan, such as avarice, deceit, greed, and heed-
lessness, are found (Mirqiit al-mafiitib 2:400).

63. Solitude is better than being in bad company, and being in good
company is better than solitude. Saying what is good is better than si-
lence, and silence is better than saying what is bad (Mustadrak, Bayhaqi,

Shu'ab al-!miin).

;.  o         ~j.:\1o  J~.,.,(oJ. It)

..::; _r..li

64. Death is a gift for a believer (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-!miin).

For the one who truly believes, it is through the gateway of death that he finds the door
to eternal contentment and happiness (Mirqiit al-mafiit!b 4:75).
48 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

65. Allah's hand is with a group (Tirmidhl).

The "hand" ofAllah possibly alludes to the assistance ofAllah and His divine guidance,
mercy, and protection, though we leave its final meaning to Allah. In this narration,
the Messenger of Allah then continued by saying, "Whoever becomes apart [from the
group-through a deviant belief, statement, or action] will be set apart in the Hellfire
[away from the rest in Paradise] (Mirqat al-mafatil:z 1:421).

p :_;:; f;\ 01 J5 0
          /  /  ,               /     /       .:;;  /  ,..,  ,....         J. ..... ,..... ~
;tl )'~ ji                      ji ~j~ ~i ~! ~ ~ ~
                                                                       ~"% (ii)

66. Every word uttered by a child ofAdam will be held against him and
not in favor of him, except enjoining good, forbidding wrong, and the
remembrance of Allah (Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).

On the Day of Judgment, a person will be held accountable for everything he has said.
Gossip and idle talk cause the hearts to harden and to become further from the mercy
of Allah. The person who engages in idle talk is deprived of the reward he could have
gained had he enjoined good, forbidden evil, or spent his time in the remembrance of
Allah by glorifying Him, praising Him, extolling His greatness, supplicating to Him
(du'if), reciting the Qur'an, or by invoking blessings (§alawat) upon His Messenger il:J;,
(Mirqat al-mafati/:z s:6o1, Mazad al-raghibin 28).

67. The likeness of one who remembers his Lord [Allah] versus one
who does not is the likeness of a living person versus a dead one (Bukhari,

Muslim).

[A] Remembrance of Allah is nourishment for the heart. Without it the heart remains
spiritually empty. This is a matter of great significance, and scholars have paid much
attention to this subject and written many books on it.

                   ;t~~~~~~ ;s ~ ~c?~~ ~~ (iA)
                   ..... .....     /     '/}        /               /  ~

68. The likeness of knowledge from which no benefit is derived is that

ofa treasure from which no portion is spent in the path of Allah (AI:zmad,

Darimi).
                                                   COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS 1:::?9 49

69. The most virtuous form of remembrance is Lii iliiha illa 'Lliih (there
is no deity save Allah) and the most virtuous supplication is Al-~amdu
li 'Lliih (all praise be to Allah) (Tirmidhf, Ibn Miija).

'Allama Tibi relates that the words Lii iliiha ilia 'Lliih have the ability to purify the heart
from evil. By proclaiming Lii iliiha, a person renounces all deities [both tangible and
intangible], and through ilia 'Lliih, he affirms the oneness of Allah alone. The remem-
brance of Allah penetrates his heart, and he is infused with the sweetness of faith.

   Al-~amdu li 'Lliih has been called "the most virtuous supplication" because supplica-
tion is a means of remembering Allah (dhikr) and of asking Him to fulfill one's needs.
The words Al-~amdu li 'Lliih contain both of these elements, since a person who praises
Allah praises Him for His favors; and praising Allah for His favors is to indirectly ask
Him for more of His bounty. This is essentially gratitude (shukr), regarding which
Allah says, "If you are grateful, I will surely add more (favors) unto you" (Qur'an 14:7)
(Mirqiit al-majiitf~ 5:134).

 Y. J! J;i ~-;;

:l_r2-llj
               ,..... &1/ 0J,. J~             zj;  ~~I0 f      \  _j.  ,  .....
            ~                                              0/~I ~~ ~ (V·) /.
                                   Zf-:UI
:l_:,.:.ll

70. The first to be called to Paradise on the Day of Judgment will be
those who praised Allah during times ofprosperity and adversity (Bayhaqi,

Shu'ab al-fmiin).

 NOMINAL SENTENCES BEGINNING WITH THE PARTICLE LA

71. He who does not keep his trusts has no faith, and he who does not
keep his agreements has no religion (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-fmiin).

One explanation of this Q.adith is that the negation intended here is a negation of the
completeness (kamiil) of faith and of certitude (yaqfn) in religion, not of faith and
50 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

religion themselves [that is, a person does not necessarily become an unbeliever by
these actions, but is doing something unbecoming of a believer]. Another explanation
is that a person who becomes wont to such evil habits could be led to lose faith and
religion completely (Mirqat al-mafat!b 1:199).

~,...-o,.,..  ,..;  J.;.o  _. .     ,...     ,_,.....,.....o,....
U50l5 t;:, ~:, -~~ ~ ~ ~:, ·!-;.l:Jl5 ~ ~ (vr)

72. There is no intelligence like planning, no nobility like good character,
and no piety like restraint (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-!man).

There is "no intelligence like planning" the outcomes of one's actions and prudently
ascertaining what will benefit one in the Hereafter. "No nobility like good character"
means having cordial interactions (mudarat) with people while observing the limits of
Allah. "No piety like restraint" means holding oneself back from all things prohibited
and doubtful (Mirqat al-majanb 8:795).

73. There is no clement person who has not stumbled, nor is there a
wise person who possesses no experience (Tirmidh!, Mustadrak).

The basic premise ofthis }:!.adith is that one who has stumbled and made mistakes knows
the value of forgiveness, and hence will be more forgiving toward others when they
make mistakes. A wise person is someone whose actions and decisions are based on
experience (Mirqat al-majatlb 8:786).

                                 i~~~ ~ ~)J~ ~(vi)

                                 /        /  /

74. There is no celibacy in Islam (Abu Dawud, Mustadrak).

Besides celibacy, ~arura also means to abandon performing the pilgrimage (bajj) after
it had become obligatory. Such a person is not considered a complete Muslim (Mirqat
al-mafat!b 5:397).
                                                               COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 51

75. There is no obedience to any creation in which the disobedience of
the Creator is involved (Baghawi, Shar~ al-Sunna).

[A] Therefore, whenever there are two conflicting positions, the command ofAllah will
always take precedence and nothing can justify disobedience to the One who created
us. For instance, one is strongly commanded to be respectful to one's parents, but when
they command something that conflicts with a command of Allah or His Messenger
~' their command will be overruled.

76. There is no harm in wealth for one who fears Allah the Powerful,
the Exalted (Ibn Maja, A~mad, Mustadrak).

A wealthy person who is pious and God-fearing is likely to spend his wealth in the path
of Allah and in promoting good. On the other hand, an unrighteous person is more
likely to squander his wealth-an act that will be held against him in the Hereafter
(Mazad al-raghibin 30). The Messenger of Allah~ once remarked, "How excellent is
pure wealth in the possession of a righteous person" (Al-Adab al-mufrad).

                       NOMINAL SENTENCES BEGINNING
                              WITH THE PARTICLE lNNA

n Indeed some forms of speech are magical (Bukhari).

Certain speech is "magical" in the sense that it can be spellbinding and used to captivate
the hearts of people (Mazad al-raghibin 31), [A] whether this be for the sake of good
or otherwise.
52 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

78. There is wisdom in some forms of poetry (Bukharf).

                    --iL;: ~~~ ~ ~~ -~ ~~~ ~ ~~ (v~)

79. In some forms of knowledge there is ignorance, and some forms of
speech are a source of hardship (Abu Dawud).

Sacred knowledge ('ilm) illuminates the path of guidance for a person and deters him
from sin. Hence, it is favorable. On the contrary, some forms of knowledge are not
considered beneficial by the Shari'a, and therefore ignorance of them is praiseworthy.
Acquiring non-beneficial knowledge derails a person from seeking beneficial knowledge
and thus becomes a cause for ignorance of what is beneficial. The scholar Azhari says
it means a person who abandons acting on the knowledge he possesses and thereby it
is considered a form of ignorance [for him, since he is like one who does not possess
the knowledge]. Allah says, "The similitude ofthose who were entrusted the Torah, but
who subs~quently failed in those obligations, is that of a donkey which carries huge
tomes [but understands them not]" (Qur'an 62:5). Qatada says, "The Companions of
Allah's Prophet fll!. reached a consensus that anything through which Allah is disobeyed
is a form of ignorance, and anyone who disobeys Allah is ignorant:'

   Some forms of speech can be a "source of hardship" when it is delivered to one
who is either already aware of it or one who is incapable of comprehending it (Mirqat
al-majat!~ 8:554).

,0                                                      :;
.!.\f' :~~~~ ~ 01 (A·)

So. Even the slightest ostentation [in good works] is associating others
with Allah (Ibn Maja).

[A] In another l_ladith, the Messenger ofAllah ill' said, "The greatest offears I have upon
you is the 'lesser association' (al-shirk al-a~ghar):' The Companions asked what the lesser
association was. He replied, "Ostentation. Allah will say to such people [who perform
deeds to show off in front of others] on the Day He grants His servants retribution for
their deeds, 'Go to those for whom you acted ostentatiously. Do you find by them any
reward or good?"' (Mishkat al-Ma~ab!~ from Shu'ab al-!man 456).
                                                   COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 53

81. The consultant is placed in a position of trust (Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).

This means that the person who is consulted is obligated to provide sincere and sound
advice, so that he does not betray the trust placed on him (Mirqat al-mafati}:t 8:791).

                           ~~ ..;~,;. c;J j:::JI 01 (Ar)

82. The fortunate one is he who is protected from trials (Abu Dawud).

The Messenger of Allah ~ repeated this statement thrice and then said, "And the one
who is tested but perseveres, then glad tidings are for him" (Mirqat a/-mafati}:t 9:289).

83. Children are a source of miserliness and cowardice (Ibn Maja, A}:tmad).

This ]:ladith highlights two possible negative effects ofchildren on their parents. The first
is miserliness owing to fear of poverty or fear of not being able to provide the child a
suitable upbringing. The second is cowardice that, owing to fear of dying and leaving
the children orphaned, a father could be deterred from fighting in the path of Allah
Most High (Mirqat al-mafati}:t 8:469-470).

84. Allah is beautiful and loves beauty (Muslim).

"Allah is beautiful" in all aspects-in His essence, attributes, and actions-"and loves
 beauty" in His creation. Another ]:ladith states, "Verily Allah loves to see the effects of
 His blessings upon His servant" (Mirqat al-mafati}:t 8:829).

                         ~; 0~ J5J~ ~~ <;, J5J 01 (Ao)
                         rtf~'  _....  ,;  / rtf~' ..  ..... ,....

85. For everything there is eagerness, and for every eagerness there is

a weakening (Tirmidhl).

Some worshippers set out to perform an abundant amount ofdeeds, but then gradually
diminish in their performance, and sometimes give up altogether. This is not what the
Shari'a encourages. What is encouraged is that a person be moderate in what he takes
54 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

up for himself, remain between exaggeration and negligence, and continue to perform
unabated (Mazad al-raghibin 33).

86. Truthfulness is a source of contentment and falsehood is a source
of doubt (Tirmidhi).

No doubt, this refers to a true believer-one who has purified his heart from the rust
and yolk ofsins and lowly desires. Such a believer can easily differentiate between truth
and falsehood by the contentment or unease he feels in his heart (MirqiU a/-mafati~
6:24, Mazad a/-raghibin 34). This Q.adith is a continuation ofi:Iadith 137.

                            ;. 0  .,,....  0  ~ ;. 0 / "" 0  .-;;
                            .:l:;J\ · ·"'q 0\ (AV) ~i ~I< ;. ,...
                            . . - "' . . - i.JJ_r "

87. Livelihood seeks a person out in the same way that his death does

(Abu Nu'aym.lfilya).

In fact, livelihood comes before death because death only comes once a person has
received all the livelihood and provision destined for him (Mirqat a/-mafati~ 9:173).

                      i}JI ~.S:J.. 0~~\ &~~ 51k: ~ l\ ~l (AA)
                      ,...  ,.. ""'        ,... /
                                                                   ,.....

88. Satan runs through a human like blood runs [through the body]

(Bukhari).

Satan operates so swiftly in deceiving the human and prompting him with evil thoughts
that he is likened to the fast flow of blood through a person's body, which a person does
not even feel. It also signifies the strong influence he has over people through their evil-
inciting selves (al-nafs a/-ammara bi '/-sil). Another explanation is that just as blood
will continue to run through a person's body until death, Satan will also remain with
him until then (Mirqat al-mafati~ 1:245-246).
                                                        COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS t::::==i 55

89. For every Umma there is a temptation, and the temptation of my
Umma is wealth (Tirmidhl).

90. The fastest supplication to be accepted is one made by somebody
for an absent person (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhl).

This is because such supplications are made with pureness of intention and sincerity
 and being far removed from ostentation (Mirqat al-majatil;s:23).

91. A person is deprived of livelihood by the sins he commits (Ibn Maja,

Mustadrak).
"Livelihood" either means the reward of the next world, which a person is deprived of
 by the sins he commits, or the livelihood ofthis world (wealth, health, and general well-
 being), which a Muslim is deprived of so that his sins can be removed and his status in
 the Hereafter elevated (Mirqat a/-mafati/:18:662).

92. A soul will never die until it fully receives all of its livelihood (Ibn

Maja).
 See Q.ad!th 87 and 91.

93. Voluntary charity extinguishes the anger of the Lord and prevents
an unpleasant death (Tirmidhi, Ibn Ifibban).
s6 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

94· You are not superior to a white- [lit., red], or black-skinned person,
unless you excel him in piety (Abmad).

According to Allah, the most noble and excellent person is the one with the highest
 degree of piety and reverent fear of Allah in his heart. Allah says, "0 mankind! We
 created you from a single (pair of a) male and a female, and made you into nations and
 tribes, that you may know each other. Verily the most honored of you in the sight of
Allah is the most righteous of you" (Qur'an 49:13). There are three grades of taqwa, or
"piety": (1) the lowest degree is abstinence from ascribing partners to Allah (a/-shirk a/-
jati); (2) the middle degree is abstinence from sins, disobediences, useless actions, and
ostentation in obedience (al-shirk al-khafi); (3) and the highest degree is that a person
 be in constant presence (hw;lur) with Allah and absent from all besides Him (Mirqat
 al-majatfb 7:54).

95. Allah does not look at your appearance or wealth but looks at your
heart and actions (Muslim).

Allah "looks at your heart" by observing the number of praiseworthy and evil traits har-
 bored within it (i.e., the level ofconviction, sincerity, truthfulness, and ostentation), and
"looks at your actions" by observing their validity or level of corruption-and rewards
 for each accordingly. He does not observe a person's physical appearance, nor does He
 look at how much wealth a person has accumulated (Mirqat al-majatfb 9:175).

96. It is a good deed that you meet your [Muslim] brother with a smil-
ing face (Muslim, Tirmidhl).

97. The closest to Allah of people is the one who begins the salam (Abu

Dawud).
 [A] "The closest to Allah;' i.e., in terms of receiving His mercy and forgiveness. "The
 one who begins the sa/am" is the one who says the sa/am to others first.
                                   COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 57

98. Interest, however much it might accrue, leads in the end to penury

(Ibn Maja, A~mad, Mustadrak).

[A] Wealth accumulated through interest and usurious dealings will not only be de-
void of divine value or blessing, but it will lead the earner of such wealth to disgrace
and spiritual poverty. Spiritual poverty is worse than financial poverty because it can
lead one to kufr (Allah forbid), whereas many who live meager lifestyles never ponder
committing kufr because their souls are healthy and tasting the sweetness of faith (see
l:tadith no).

                       < j /;j1 ~I j ;~(55~~\ j ;j ~~\ ~l (~~)
                                                                 .....
                             /        /          /                                     /

99. Anger ruins faith just as the aloe plant ruins honey (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab

al-fman).

"Ruins faith;' i.e., its completeness, light, and beauty. Sometimes it could actually lead
 to the destruction of one's faith (Mirqat al-mafati~ 8:843).

100. Truth is a piety, and piety leads to Paradise; falsehood is an iniquity,
and iniquity leads to Hellfire (Muslim, Abu Dawud).

;.,.....     /            0     0        ;. 0 /  ;.              ;. /   .....  .:;
~~.?)·u~j2)·uql;ijj ·.::;~\11J~~r/-410l (,.,,
                .....              ...-
          /            /                                                            /

                                   Jl.Ji ~W.G ,Jij.!JI ~ftj ,Jlij j;;

                                   /             ......  ......                           ......

101. Verily Allah has forbidden to you disobedience to mothers, bury-

ing daughters alive, denying what you owe and demanding what you

have no right to, and has disliked for you idle talk and gossip, excessive

questioning, and squandering wealth (Bukharf, Muslim).
 58 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

"Mothers" are specifically mentioned here for emphasis-even though disobeying the
father is also prohibited-because mothers are normally the [physically] weaker ofthe
 two parents [and more prone to emotion]. "Has disliked for you idle talk and gossip"
 because it leads to greater sins, such as backbiting, tale bearing, and slander. "Excessive
 questioning" is disliked when it is for reasons such as testing someone's knowledge un-
 necessarily or inquiring about issues that do not concern a person (Mirqat al-mafatib
 8:651-652).

102. The most beloved practice in the sight of Allah is love for the sake
of Allah and hatred for the sake of Allah (Abu Dawud, Abmad).

 Love and hatred for the sake ofAllah become the "most beloved practice" and the most
 complete forms of obedience only after a person seeks knowledge, fulfils his religious
 obligations, and refrains from what is prohibited in the Sharl'a. These two acts cannot
 be superior to or entail greater reward than obligatory acts of worships, such as prayer
 and zakat, nor be given priority over them. A narration related by Tabaranl on the
 authority of Ibn 'Abbas ~ makes this distinction clear: "The most beloved of actions
 after the obligatory actions (fara'ilj) is to cause the heart of a believer to be happy"
 (Mirqat al-mafatib 8:753).

 r-b:~:,r~~J ~~~J ~J ;:u1 ~~ ~! ~ ~ 0;1~ t;l~ ~il10! ~r (,·r)

103. Verily the world is accursed and accursed is what it contains, except
the remembrance of Allah, that which Allah loves, and someone with
sacred knowledge or someone learning it (Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).

"That which Allah loves;' i.e., righteous deeds. Ibn 'Abbas~ said, "Allah has divided the
world into three portions: one for the believer, one for the hypocrite, and one for the
unbeliever. A believer makes provisions [for the Hereafter], a hypocrite adorns [himself],
 and an unbeliever enjoys [himself]:'

   "Someone with sacred knowledge" and "someone learning it" have been mentioned as
 being exempt from the accursedness ofthe world, in order to emphasize the importance
 of the student and teacher of sacred knowledge. This statement refers to the scholars of
Allah [and students] who move between sacred knowledge and righteous action. Hence,
 the ignorant, and those scholars who do not practice upon their knowledge, and those
                                                  COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 59

who pursue useless forms of knowledge (i.e., knowledge that has no relationship to the
religion) are not part of this exemption (Mirqiit al-majiiti/:19:31-32).

-~~ J:." ll J.~ ~ Jt ~~ I~ Jt -~~~ ~ Jt .~) bJLP 1:Jjj//,....,..../

104. Among those actions and good deeds [whose rewards] a believer
will recover after his death are sacred knowledge he taught and spread,
a pious child he left behind, a copy of the Qur'an he left as a legacy, a
masjid he constructed or a house he built for the traveller, a stream he set
flowing, or voluntary charity he gave from his wealth while he was alive
and healthy-they will continue to reach him after his death (Ibn Miija).

"Sacred knowledge he taught and spread" is general and includes authored works and
 endowments of books. ''A copy of the Qur'an he left as a legacy" for his heirs [to read
 and benefit from]. This also includes books oflslamic sciences and religious literature. ''A
 masjid he constructed" also includes schools for scholars or retreats for the pious. "While
 he was alive and healthy" is confirmed by another [:ladith, in which the Messenger of
Allah~ was asked, "What charity is greatest in reward?" He said, "That you give while
you are healthy and greedy, fear poverty, and hope for prosperitY:' Some scholars have
 stated, however, that this statement does not preclude reward for charity given during
 one's illness (Mirqiit al-majiiti/:11:513-514).

                    _r.-Liil ~'~ ~~llj; ~j;J4101 ('·o)
                    / ...-           ,...
                            /  /

105. Verily Allah supports this Religion even with a sinner (Bukhiiri).

Sometimes, a sinful person [or even an unbeliever] may do something that could,
[knowingly or] unknowingly to him, be of benefit to the faith. For instance, a person
may establish a masjid or madrasa (Islamic school or institution) with corrupt intentions
(i.e., with ostentation or to gain a good reputation among people) or to compete with
another. Many Muslims may benefit from the masjid or madrasa (Mirqiit al-mafiiti/:1
10:216), [A] but the person would be sinning because of his corrupt intentions.
60 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

106. One ofthe signs of the Final Hour is that people will boast to each
other in [the grand construction] of masjids (Abu Dawud).

                 L;Jj

                                     '

[NOMINAL SENTENCES BEGINNING

   WITH THE PARTICLE] lNNAMA

                                 ~\ ~~ ~l Jlj!JI .. ,.....,., ,.....  (' ·V)

107. The cure for ignorance is to question (Abu Dawud).

This is an exhortation to seek answers to one's questions regarding faith [tenets offaith,
rules of prayer, fasting, zakat, bajj, business, marriage, etc.] (Mirqat al-mafatrb 2:231).

108. Actions will be judged only according to their sealing states [at
death] (Bukharf, Muslim).

A person will be judged in the Hereafter according to the state he dies in. A Q.ad!th of
the Messenger of Allah i1IJ!. explains that a person continues to perform the actions of
a believer all his life, then takes a turn for the worse and dies as a transgressor, [and
hence becomes worthy of Hellfire], while another person indulges in sin all his life,
then undergoes a change for the better and dies the pleasant death of a believer, [and
hence enters Paradise] (Bukharf, Muslim). I:Iad!th 108 encourages that a person remain
constant in obedience and in abstaining from sins until he leaves this world for the
next (Mirqat al-mafatrb 1:268). [A] The Messenger of Allah ii!J\ states in another Q.adlth,
clarifying what state a person will be resurrected in, that: "Every person will be resur-
rected in the condition he dies" (see l_ladlth 111).
                                                               COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 61

109. The grave is but a garden from the gardens of Paradise or a pit from
the pits of Hellfire (Tirmidhf).

The renown jurist, J:!adith scholar, and ascetic Sufyan a!-Thawri would say, "Whoever
remembers the grave frequently will find it to be a garden of Paradise, and whoever
is heedless of its remembrance will find it to be a pit of Hellfire'' (Mirqat al-mafati/:t
9:216).

~~~I·

VERBAL SENTENCES

no. There is a danger of poverty leading to unbelief (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-

iman).

This refers to "poverty" ofthe heart, as there are many who outwardly appear to be poor,
as they lack worldly goods, but are rich (ghani) at heart (see J:!adith 175). Poverty of the
heart could lead a person to unbeliefeither by expressing his displeasure with or object-
ing to the command ofAllah, or by inclining toward the unbelievers after observing them
enjoying large amounts of wealth and luxury. Many Muslims are poor and in hardship
in accordance with what has been related from the Messenger of Allah ~: "The world
is a prison for the believer and paradise for the unbeliever" (J:!adith 10 above).

   Allah Most High says in consolation to His servants, "Let not the strutting about
of the unbelievers through the land deceive you. It is but a little enjoyment; and their
abode is Hell; an evil bed. For those who fear their Lord are Gardens beneath which
rivers flow; therein are they to dwell forever. A gift of welcome from Allah. And that
which is from Allah is the best for the righteous" (Qur'an p96-198).

   In a J:!adith transmitted by Imam Bukhari, 'Umar ~ relates, "I arrived to find the
Messenger of Allah ~ in a small room resting on a straw mat with nothing in between
him and it. His head was rested on a leather pillow filled with palm fibers.... I saw the
lines from tl!e mat marking his side and began to weep. He asked what had made me
weep. I said, '0 Messenger of Allah, Caesar and Cosroes enjoy the [prosperity] that
they have, whereas you, the Messenger of Allah, are [in this state]?' He replied, 'Are
62 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

you not content that for them is this world and for us is the Hereafter?"' (Mirqat al-
mafati~ 8:781-782).

111. Every person will be resurrected in the condition he dies (Muslim).

[A] Ifa person dies in a good state, then he or she will be with the righteous. Conversely,
if a person dies in a bad state, then he or she will be resurrected with the unrighteous
(see l!adith 108).

               ~ t; ~ _;~ ~f ~~ :~~ JS ('"')

112. For a person to be classified as a liar it is sufficient that he say ev-
erything he hears (Muslim, Abu Dawud).

A person who has the habit of relaying without verification everything he hears will
inevitably pass on something that is not true, and thus be considered a liar, even if he
did not intend to lie. This l!adith demands one to verify whatever one hears before
passing it on to others (Mirqat al-mafat!~ 1:392).

113. Every sin is forgiven for a martyr except debt (Muslim).

Both major and minor sins are forgiven through martyrdom. However, debts and rights
owed to people must be forgiven by the people first before Allah will forgive them. A
narration in Sunan Ibn Maja does mention that "a person martyred in the ocean will
have his debts forgiven too:' but its chain is weak. While this l!adith relates to the one
who defers repayment of a debt despite having the capability to do so, Allah Most High
will repay the debts of the one who intended to pay back his debts but was unable to
due to a lack of means, as has been related from Abii Sa'id al-Khudri 4> (Takmila Fat~
al-Mulhim 3:413).
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS 1::?9 63

114. Accursed is the slave of the dinar and the dirham (Bukharf, Tirmidhf).

This ]:lad!th refers to those whose main aim in life is the accumulation of wealth that
has led them to become heedless of the remembrance of Allah and other religious
obligations (Maziid al-riighibfn 39).

us. Hellfire is veiled with desires and Paradise is veiled with displeasures

(Bukhiiri, Muslim, Tirmidhf).

Imam Nawawi writes that Paradise cannot be gained except by undertaking hardships
[like fulfilling the obligations of Allah and refraining from His prohibitions], and that
Hellfire is earned by indulging in vain desires (Mirqiit al-mafiitib 9:11).

:u ~I~ ~.:.:Jij ~~I~ ~.:.:JI.~lJI ~ ·~ f;T ~I r~ (W\)

116. A son of Adam becomes old but two things in him become young:
greed for wealth and greed for more life (Bukhiiri, Muslim, Tirmidhi).

[A] One's greed for wealth and more life increases as one becomes older.

                                                            ~        ~·J.~1/0  ~j..1)~""'1\'~'·'ft1l( .\W\y:,

                                                 1,~·:':.-J.
·, ~ J. 0;
~\·O·:.J1. ~'~ ··O·J. '1,0(~'·~/·/,~1/-~''·'e10                l  l

117. What an excellent person the religious scholar is-when needed he
is helpful and when not needed he enriches himself (Razin).

[A] In other words, when the advice of the religious scholar is sought, he obliges;
otherwise, he remains independent and self-reliant, enriching himself by engaging in
study and worship.

w ··" (\\A) ;u;,j · ,;a.;.;;'~(y.J.. ;' _,:;. ~ _....;. .V.'~.>.!' ;.
                                                                        "·,...~')l,l,...J:,....:. ~~IIo~,~ ~,
                                                                                                        '-...,;
                 "--.: J":' · I                  o  ~

.J .J  0·  .J  081 ~.J                              P             ;  "
                      .. /
           , . , c::; /
                                                                        \                   ;. ,....             /
                                                    J":' :L~
                                                                        ~..o""J""  ~t;""    ~t;.                 o,..,.
                                                                                        .J

118. Three things follow a dead person, then two things return and
64 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

one remains with him: his family, wealth, and deeds go with him, then
his family and wealth return [from his gravesite] and his deeds remain

(Bukharf, Muslim, Tirmidhf).
[A] The best investment a person can make in this world is good deeds for the Hereafter,
for all else is in vain.

d1; 0r it;> ~~l5 ~ ~..... ~r/; .,. .;~ ~ ..... G!~ ./!.l~t/ ~~_,..;. / ?  ~ft ("~)
..... ,...,,..,..  ..... ,
                            /  /

119. It is a heinous breach of trust that you tell your brother something

that makes him believe you, when you are lying [to him] (Abu Dawud).

120. What an evil person is he who stores merchandise and, if Allah
causes the prices to fall, is grieved and, if He causes them to increase, is
pleased (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-fman).

This ]:ladith refers to a person who hoards food rations at times of need, waiting for their
demand to increase and then selling them at a higher price (Mazad al-raghibfn 41).

            ANOTHER FORM OF VERBAL SENTENCES: THOSE

         BEGINNING WITH THE NEGATING LA PARTICLE

121. A talebearer will not enter Paradise (Bukharf, Muslim).

Although the word qattat has been used synonymously with nammam, some have said
a qattat is a person who listens in on people's conversations [without their knowledge]
and afterward spreads the information to others, whereas a nammam is one who spreads
information after being present in the discussion [i.e., while the people discussing are
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 65

aware of his or her presence]. And afattiish is a person who spreads information after
poking around for it and inquiring others about it (Majma' bi~iir al-anwiir 4:209).

   Many ]:ladiths (for instance, 122 and 124) contain the words "will not enter Paradise"
for believers who commit certain misdeeds. These ]:ladiths have been understood by the
overwhelming majority of scholars to mean that such a believer will not immediately
be entered in Paradise, but will be cleansed ofhis sins in Hellfire first and then entered,
by the mercy of Allah, into Paradise (Mirqat a/-majiitf~ 8:659).

122. One who breaks ties of kinship will not enter Paradise (Bukhari,

Muslim).

123. A believer is not bitten from the same hole twice (Bukhari, Muslim).

A true believer must always act intelligently so that he is not deceived twice, especially
from the same source, in matters related to this world and the Hereafter (Mirqiit al-
majiitf~ 8:784, Maziid al-raghibin 42). This ]:ladith warns against heedlessness in one's
affairs and that a person should not allow himself to be deceived, either due to his
forbearance or otherwise (Fat~ al-Biiri 3:2685).

0&;4'1 ~,.~, Y.~~~:_;.~I .:;;//0J, >;-. ~'1/

                                            ("'i)

124. A person will not enter Paradise from whose mischiefhis neighbors
are not safe (Muslim).

125. The body nourished with unlawful means will not enter Paradise

(Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-imiin).

[A] This includes when the food and drink are acquired through unlawful means (usury,
theft, etc.) and when they are considered unlawful for consumption in themselves (i.e.,
their ingredients).
66 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

126. None of you is a [perfect] believer until his desires are in confor-
mance with what I have come with (Abii '1-Qasim Isma'il ibn al-Fac;ll, Kitab
al-Ifujja fi ittiba' al-ma~ajja).

For a person to be a complete believer, his ambitions, desires, and goals must all be
in accordance with what is pleasing to Allah and His Messenger i?J!!.. Their desires and
judgments must supersede his own desires and opinions (Mirqat al-mafatt~ 1:412) [A]
The way to reach this state is by subduing one's lower self(najs) from acting on impulses
that are in violation ofislamic law and to patiently persevere in fulfilling the commands
of Allah and His Messenger ~.

127. It is not lawful for a Muslim to frighten another Muslim (Abu

Dawud).

[A] Part of trusting another Muslim is that one should not fear being frightened by
him.

~

o~' ~

 .J,.r-P
\'f.A) u '\ ~'{" o.,.... /

 · .)
          .~-~w~·. ~j. /J~ W...... I0  k...,l;~ , ,.......  41

128. Angels do not enter a house in which there is a picture or a dog

(Bukharf, Muslim).

"Picture" refers to all animate drawings, forms, pictures, and photos, whether they cast a
 shadow or not, unless they are in a degraded position (i.e., a picture on a floor covering
 that is trodden upon). The occupants of such a dwelling are deprived of the presence
 of angels and their prayers and their seeking forgiveness for them. Angels do not enter
 places containing animate pictures because animate forms are often taken for worship.
The Messenger of Allah$ said, "Those who make [draw, print, or publish animate]
 pictures will be punished on the Day ofJudgment and it will be said to them, 'Bring to
 life what you have created"' (Bukharf, Muslim). "Angels" here refer to guardian angels
 (~afa:;a) and angels of mercy, and not the Angel of Death, who calls upon people at
 their appointed time wherever they are.

    The reason for angels not entering where dogs are present is because dogs are consid-
 ered to be filthy. Also, some dogs have been referred to as devils in the ]:ladiths (Mirqat
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS bA 67

al-mafi'itlb 8:265-266, Mazad al-raghibln 43). [A] Inanimate pictures, like that ofscenery,
buildings, or products are not included in the prohibition.

~f ~Oij ~~jj ~~~~ ~ ~! ~f 5.;5f J;- rsJ;.f ~~ ~ ('r~)

129. None among you is a [perfect] believer until I become more beloved
to him than his father, his children, and all people (Bukharl, Muslim).

The word "love" in this J:!adith does not refer to the natural love (al-bubb al-tabl'l) one
feels for someone, since such love is beyond one's control. This refers to a logical love
(al-bubb al-'aqll), which demands that a person give priority to what the intellect gives
preference to, even if it goes against his personal desires. This is similar to the love of
a sick person for medicine, who only consumes it due to his knowledge of its benefits,
despite his natural dislike for it. Hence, love for Allah's Messenger iii\ demands that a
person fulfill his commands, despite natural inclinations not to, knowing that true
benefit and salvation will come from following those commands. Love here could also
refer to the love of belief (al-bubb al-lmanl) that develops because of awe and respect
for Allah's Messenger it. and his bounties and mercy upon the believers. Hence, one
gives preference to the desires of the beloved [Messenger iii\] over the desires of one's
family and self, especially when the Messenger ~ has been characterized with all pos-
sible elements oflove-knowledge, inward and outward beauty, sublime character, and
abundant generosity (Mirqat al-mafatlb 1:145).

J;-;.;c;d2;_:J~.:;i.~li.j_:J~~f~0f~~~I.'~~~~  (nw·)
                                    ~
                                       /

                                    "

                                              )01

130. It is not lawful for a Muslim to sever relationships with his brother
for more than three days. Whoever does sever relationships for more
than three days and then dies will enter Hellfire (Abu Dawiid).

"And dies;' i.e., without repentance and "will go to Hellfire;' Tiirpushtl explains, means
 that he becomes deserving of a place in Hellfire, although the final decision is in the
 hands of Allah (Mirqat al-mafat!b 8:768). If one severs ties for religious reasons-for
 instance, with an innovator or transgressor [attempting to admonish them or to safe-
 guard against their evil]-it will not be prohibited. The Messenger ;j. severed ties with
68 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Ka'b ibn Malik and two other Companions for fifty days following the expedition of
Tabuk (Bukhari) (Mazad al-raghibin 43).

                              (""'' ~~_.'., j!~;;; ~J.lt);':, J,....

131. Mercy is not taken away except from a wretched person (Abu Dawud,

Abmad).
This indicates that mercy is a bounty from Allah. When a person is merciful to himself
and others, Allah is merciful to him. The Prophet~ said, ''Allah is merciful upon those
who are merciful to others. Have mercy upon those on earth and the One in the Heavens
will have Mercy upon you" (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi) (Mirqat al-mafatib 8704).

132. Verily another person's belongings are unlawful [to take] except
with his heart's content (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-iman, Daraqutni).

[A] For instance, even ifone were to acquire someone's property through their apparent
consent, but the consent was acquired through coercion, force, intimidation, or pressure,
it would be without their heart's consent, hence unlawful.

;; -~r.r:-  ~"    .·:kt-~ :'~~--j  ~iJ1    ~~       (w·r)
                                        ;
              .J                                 0

133. The angels do not accompany a group in which there is a dog or
bell (Muslim, Abu Dawud).

 Guard or hunter "dogs" are exempt from this warning. Regarding "bells;' a i,ladith states,
"Bells are the flutes of Satan'' (l,ladith 13 above). Another states, "With every bell, there
 is a satan:' Bells are said to make one heedless of the remembrance of Allah. The use
 of bells is prohibitively disliked (makruh) for entertainment purposes, but permissible
 for certain valid functions like signaling the end of a class (Takmila Fatb al-Mulbim
4:179). See also l,ladith 128.
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 69

                IMPERATIVE AND PROHIBITIVE SENTENCES

                                                                    ?~· ·yy/ .),-f~ iJ ;'1~ '-;.'~ftt-:(""i)

134. Convey from me, even if only a verse (Bukhari).

The meaning of "verse" is general here, in that it encompasses portions of the Qur'an,
}:!ad!ths, and all other beneficial knowledge received from the Messenger of Allah iii1>
(Mirqat al-mafatil:z 1:446).

135. Treat people according to their individual statuses (Abu Dawud).

People should be honored according to their position on the scales ofknowledge, piety,
moral excellence, and nobility, and one should observe these individual values when
dealing with them. For example, the Prophets of Allah (upon them be peace) have
superiority over all other persons, and the four rightly guided caliphs have superiority
over the rest ofthe Umma. Allah says, "And we raise some ofthem above others in rank''
(Qur'an 43:32). And, "Allah will raise to high ranks those who believe among you and
those who possess knowledge (Qur'an sS:n):' Hence, people are of different ranks and
positions in this world (Mirqat al-majatf/:z 8:723) [A] and must be treated accordingly.
However, this does not grant one the license to degrade or humiliate any person.

136. Intercede so that you may be rewarded (Bukhari, Muslim).

[A] "Interceding" for someone can be by putting in a good word for them or mak-
ing a recommendation, thereby enabling them to derive some permissible benefit or
position.
 70 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

137. Leave that which puts you in doubt for that which does not (Tirmidhi,

Abmad, Mustadrak).
Abandon practices or statements concerning which you have doubt--whether they
 are prohibited or sunna or reprehensible innovations-and restrict yourself to what is
 clearly lawful. Scrupulousness is that a believer base his actions on deep conviction in
 regard to his faith through insight and verification (Mirqat al-mafatib 6:24). Follow-
 ing the above statement, the Messenger of Allah l!l\ said, "Truthfulness is a source of
 contentment and falsehood is a source of doubt" (see J:tadith 86).

138. Fear Allah wherever you may be; follow up a bad deed with a good
one, and it will erase it; and treat people with good character (Tirmidhi,

Abmad, Darimi).
"Fear Allah'' by fulfilling all ofHis commands and refraining from all He has prohibited.
"Wherever you may be'' means that the fear of Allah should not just be expressed in
 front of others but internalized in such a way that one fears Him all the time, includ-
 ing when in isolation, prosperity, or adversity. "With a good one;' i.e., repentance and
 other good deeds, for Allah says, "Verily good deeds remove bad deeds" (Qur'an 11:114)
 (Mirqat al-mafattb 8:810 ).

139. Do not befriend anyone but a believer, and let not anyone but a
God-fearing person eat your food (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhl).

A believer's friendship should be with believers, better still with complete believers
(mu'min kamil), whose company can provide spiritual benefit and bring one closer to
Allah. It should not be with unbelievers or hypocrites. "Let not anyone but a God-fear-
 ing person eat your food;' because feeding creates a feeling oflove between a host and
guest, and this type of feeling is best created with the pious.

    Feeding here only relates to formal invitations and not to feeding the destitute and
hungry in general-where a believer is not required to stop and investigate their piety
 [or religion] before feeding them. Allah says, "And they feed, for the love of Allah, the
                                                               COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 71

 indigent, the orphan, and the captive;' (Qur'an 76:8) from which it is clear that the
captives in this context are unbelievers (MirqiU al-mafiiti~ 8:750).

140. Fulfill the trust of the one who entrusts you, and do not betray the
one who betrays you (Abu Diiwud, Diiriml).

A person should not repay an excess with another excess. It is superior to repay in
kindness, as Allah says, "Nor can goodness and evil be equal. Repel (evil) with what is
 better: then will he between whom and you was hatred become as he were your friend
 and intimate" (Qur'an 41:34). This does not prohibit reclaiming one's possessions from
 the person who has usurped them, since that is reclaiming one's own rights and not an
 excess (Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 6:138).

141. Say, "I believe in Allah;' and then stand firm (Muslim, Tirmidhl).

Istiqiima, "standing firm;' means fulfilling all obligations and abstaining from all prohi-
 bitions, in all external (?iihir) and internal (biitin) actions. One cannot stand firm with
 deviances in this regard. Once one proclaims faith in Allah, it is obligatory to remain
 steadfast on all that one has been commanded to do. Allah says, "Verily those who say,
'Our Lord is Allah; and remain firm (on the path), on them shall be no fear, nor shall
 they grieve" (Qur'an 46:13). Fakhr a!- Din al-Razi, the great Muslim theologian, says,
"Jstiqiima is an extremely difficult matter, since it encompasses (a) beliefs (i.e., that one
 have firm beliefin all the tenets offaith)- that a person keep from likening to Allah any
 of His creatures (tashb!h ), or of negating any of His attributes (ta'til); (b) actions-that
 a person abstain from substituting or altering [worships]; and (c) conduct-that a
 person refrain from exceeding the bounds (ifriit) and falling short of them (tafr!t) [for
 instance, to refrain from boasting while at the same time not abasing oneself either]:'
 Imam Ghazali says, "Istiqiima on the straight path [in this world] is as difficult as cross-
 ing the bridge over Hellfire. Both paths are more delicate than hair and sharper than
 the sword" (Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 1:162).
 72 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

142. The more virtuous from among you should make the call to prayer
for you, and the fine reciters from among you should lead you in prayer

 (Abu Dawud, Ibn Maja).
This is a recommendation, not an obligation (Mirqat al-majati~ 3=196). [A] Prayer will
 be valid behind a transgressor, though in most cases strongly disliked.

143. Do not admit those who do not begin with salam (Bayhaql, Shu'ab

 al-iman).
 [A] The importance of saying sa/am when entering a place (for instance, the home) and
 the undesirability of entering without saying are clear from this l_ladlth.

144. Do not pluck out gray hair, for it is the light of a Muslim (Abu

Dawud, A~mad).
As a person becomes older and his hair turns grey, he usually becomes more wary of
 committing sin and turns to performing good acts. His grave is therefore illuminated by
 his pious deeds, and ultimately, they become a source of light for him in the Hereafter
 (Mirqat al-majati~ 8:235).

145. Exercise abstinence from the world and Allah will love you, and
abstain from what people have and they will love you (Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja,

Mustadrak).
"Abstinence from the world" is reached by abandoning love for it, abstaining from that
 which is beyond one's basic needs, and fervently advancing toward the Hereafter. This
 increases one's worship ofAllah, and Allah loves him because the person has abandoned
 the enemy of Allah-the world.

   "Abstaining from what people have" will cause them to love him too, simply because
                                                  COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 73

he is not seen as a competitor or threat to them in the worldly gains they seek. They
fear no harm from him in this regard.

  Zuhd, or "abstinence;' is the distancing of the soul from the world for the sake of
the Hereafter, despite having the capability [to indulge], either out offear for Hellfire,
desire for Paradise, or disdain for turning toward anything but the Truthful One (al-
Ifaq). This state can only be developed after the heart becomes expanded with the light
of certitude (yaqin). It is stated that zuhd cannot be perceived from one who does not
possess any wealth or honor to begin with. Once someone addressed the great ascetic
and ):ladith scholar 'Abdullah ibn al-Mubarak saying, "0 zahid." He replied, "The
true zahid is 'Umar ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz, who, when the world came to him in reluctant
submission, abandoned it:' This, however, is an example of the highest degree of zuhd
(Mirqat al-mafati/:t 9:40-41).

146. Be in the world as though you were a stranger or a wayfarer

(Bukhari).

Imam Nawawi says, "Do not become attached to this world and take it up as a long-time
residence. Instead, live in it as does a stranger or traveller in a foreign place:' This is
because the world is only a bridge that needs to be crossed, so a believer should occupy
himselfin worship and obedience and await departure from this world at every moment,
keeping himself free of unnecessary burdens and liabilities (Mirqat al-mafati/:t 9:126).

147. Pay the laborer his due before his sweat dries (Ibn Maja).

             ,.    ....  lj~:J           'ft;.    /      ,. 'ft  (UA)

lj~              ~J             dj~             ~J   lj_A

148. Give glad tidings [to the people] and do not frighten [them] away,
and create ease and do not create difficulty (Bukhari, Muslim).

Exhort people toward righteousness by making them aware of the great rewards
promised by Allah Most High. Do not deter and discourage them from worship and
obedience by constant admonition, as this could create despondency of the mercy of
74 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Allah. However, admonition and warning are not to be completely given up, since they
are a source of benefit, for Allah says, "Give this warning to those in whose (hearts) is
the fear that they will be brought (to judgment) before their Lord" (Qur'an 6:51).

  "Create ease and do not make difficult" means do not force people to do more than
is required of them. For instance, when collecting zakiit from them, do not attempt to
take the best of their wealth [but take that of medium quality] (Mirqiit al-mafiitl~ 7:296).
[A] A mufti should, for instance, issue his legal verdict (fatwii) upon the more lenient
opinion in one's school of thought if no corruption or misuse is feared therefrom-for
instance, offering the fatwii on shrimp being lawful based on a widespread opinion
in the I:Ianafi school as opposed to the one which states it to be prohibitively disliked.
However, this ]:ladith should not be misconstrued as sanctioning the abandonment of
religious obligations just for the sake of ease.

             ;;~  i:u·"~lL!.L::UII    ~ t<~  ('i~)

             ;;     ;Y. " -

149. Do not curse the rooster because it wakes [people] for prayer (Abu

Diiwud).

'Allama Damiri, the renowned Muslim Zoologist of the eighth century AH, states in
his Ifayiit al-~ayawiin (Animal Life), "The most fascinating quality of the rooster is its
precise awareness of the times of night ... hence, it crows before and after the time of
Fajr. Glorified is He who guided it thus:' The scholar I:Ialimi deduces from this ]:ladlth
that anything from which benefit is derived should not be cursed or degraded (Mirqiit
al-mafiitl~ 7:726-727).

             0~   ,.., 0 / / /  -;;;  ,.  d! :;...-- /  ~
             l::j.iJI .\1'"' -·~11 ~';l~Jo·p
             - -=:Y-fl - J;

150. Do not own an estate and thus begin to desire the world (Tirmidhl,

Mustadrak).

I;Jayu "estate" could refer to a business, farm, or orchard. Becoming absorbed in the
running and administration of an estate could make one neglectful of his duties to
Allah and lead him to cherish the pleasures of the world more. Hence, this ]:ladith
warns against occupations that make one heedless of his obligations to Allah (Mirqiit
al-mafiit!~ 9:33).
                                                    COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 75

151. Oppose the polytheists; lengthen the beard and clip the moustache

(Bukhart, Muslim).
Lu~a [sg. li~ya] is the hair which grows on the cheeks and chin, as Imam Suyutl, the
great Shafi'! scholar, explains. The command in the ]:J.ad!th is to let the beard grow and
to not clip it short as one should do with the moustache (Mirqat al-mafatt~ 8:211).

   A narration states that the Messenger~ would clip from the sides and length of his
beard (Tirmidhl). 'Allama T!b! explains that this does not in any way conflict with the
]:J.ad!th of "lengthen the beard;' since the prohibition is of cutting it in the way of the
unbelievers (a'ajim, lit. non Arabs or Persians). He says, "Clipping away a small amount
from the ends cannot be considered cutting (qa~~);' and this is the explanation of all
the commentators of Al-Ma~abt~. In Shar~ al-Sunna, it states that the condition [for
clipping the beard] is if it increases over a fistful [that it can be cut to fist length when
it grows beyond a fistful].

   Imam Ghazal! states in the I~ya', "There is a difference ofopinion regarding the length
of the beard. It is said that ifa person clips from that which is longer than a fistful, there
is nothing reprehensible in that. This was the practice of'Abdullah ibn 'Umar "~'a group
of the Followers (tabi'ln ), and has been preferred by Sha'b! and Ibn Sir!n. J:Iasan a!- Ba~ri
and Qatada and those who have followed them have disliked [cutting] it: "Leaving it in
its state is more beloved to us due to the command of the Messenger ~ 'lengthen the
beard:" However, the more prevalent opinion is the first (Mirqat a/-mafatt~ 8:223).

152. Feed the hungry, visit the sick, and free slaves (Bukhart, Abu Dawud).

153. A judge should not pass judgement between two people when he
is angry (Bukharl, Muslim).

Likewise, it is disliked for a judge to pass judgments in extremely hot or cold condi-
tions, and when extremely hungry, thirsty, or ill, because it is difficult for a person to
exercise the faculties of independent judgment and deep thought in these circum-
76 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

stances. However, the judgment in any case will nevertheless be legally valid (MirqiU
al-mafiit!/:t 7=33).

154. Beware of living sumptuously, for the [true] servants of Allah do
not live sumptuously (A/:tmad).

Tana"um, "living sumptuously;' has been explained as exerting every effort in acquiring
an abundance of worldly goods and going to the extreme in fulfilling one's desires [in
other words, living for the world]. This attribute is typical of the unbelievers, sinners,
heedless, and ignorant ones, as Allah says, "Leave them alone to eat and enjoy and let
[false] hope distract them, for soon they will know" (Qur'an 15:3) (Mirqiit al-mafiit!/:t

9:116).

                        Iy'-'~~J1 ;II~ o ~.:t_~                                                ~o-;':~,ŁXyo~ll   ~ .. ::~  ('oo)

                                                                                                                _r.-J

155. Do not revile the dead, for they have passed on to what they have
sent forth (Bukhiirl).

One should not revile the dead unless their unbelief has been established through
certainty, as with some of the enemies of the messengers (upon them be peace) (e.g.,
Pharaoh and Nimrod, who have been mentioned in the Qur'an to have died on unbe-
lief). However, the Messenger Mul).ammad ~said, "Of the excellence of one's Islam is
that he leaves that which does not concern him (l).ad!th 6o) (Mirqiit al-mafiit!/:t 4:152).
He ~ also said, "A believer is not an attacker nor a curser nor someone obscene or
abusive" (Tirmidhl).

J .. ~ ~                ;:a~               ~                                                   ~o.~.J~1~Y-=-  5To~\ll ~~
- u-:.1.~1       :"I"                         f~t~"'~e~~.-G·                        ~ o ~-=-                    r .J       (,oi)
                              Jjj                                               /'      ,....
,.... ,....,..,  0-" -

156. Preserve what you have memorized ofthe Qur'an, because by Him

in whose hand lies my life, it escapes [from the heart] faster than a camel

does from its rope (Bukhar!, Muslim).

The Qur'an is not the speech of a human but that of Allah Most High, the Mighty and
Eternal. It is a blessing ofAllah that it can be memorized; hence, it is to be valued dearly.
                                                  COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 77

If it is not preserved by constant review and study then it is easily lost and more difficult
to recapture than a runaway camel (Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 4:688-689).

157. Be reposeful in prostration and do not rest your forearms on the
ground as a dog does (Bukhiiri, Muslim).

Ibn J:Iajar a!-'Asqalanl, the great l:lad!th master and Shafi'l jurist, states that in the case
of a lengthy prostration it would be permitted to rest the arms on the thighs (Mirqiit
al-mafiiti~ 2:609). [A] This prohibition does not extend to women since they have
been instructed to contract in prostration, which includes placing the arms on the
ground. This is further supported by a version ofthis narration in $a~i~ Muslim, which
states that "the Messenger of Allah l1W. prohibited that a man spread his forearms like a
beast"-hence, excluding women (see Radd al-mu~tiir 1:432).

158. Command your children to perform prayer when they are seven
years of age, and beat them for neglecting it when they are ten, and [at
that age] separate their beds [between the boys and girls] (Abu Dawud,

Tirmidhi).
Prayer ($aliit), the most important obligation of Islam, should be inculcated into the
lives of children by the age of ten, well before they reach puberty (bulugh). This way
they become accustomed to fulfilling the commands of Allah from a young age. Also,
due to the rise of sexual awareness at that age [or earlier if necessary], the sleeping
areas of boys and girls are to be separated so that they also learn to abstain from the
prohibitions of Allah, avoid suspicious venues, and ensure correct social behavior
(Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 2:276).

  "And beat them ..." has been explained by Ibn 'Abidln, the great Syrian jurist, as
being with the hands and not with a rod, and that this should also not exceed three
strikes (Radd al-mu~tiir 1:235). [A] The purpose is discipline, so it is forbidden to inflict
wounds or cause injury through such beating.
78 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

159. Do not sit on graves and do not pray facing them (Muslim, Abu

Dawud).

It is severely disliked (makruh tabrlml) to sit, sleep, step, or walk on a grave and to do
by it anything not sanctioned by the Sunna (Mirqat al-mafatlb 4:178).

   [Regarding the words] "Do not pray facing them;' if there is special place designated
for prayer in a graveyard wherein there is no impurity or graves [e.g., an administrative
or prayer building at the entrance of the graveyard or to the side], then prayer would
be permitted therein (Radd al-mubtar 1:440).

~? L.P  ~_A;      ,. 0 /  ?~L.P      ~jl9 /,.....  ~~0  ~~~~0 ~~.&0 I/I_;;,~~

              jS')I_J            t;                                            (r,.)

                                                        ~  ~

160. Fear Allah regarding these mute animals [horses, camels, etc.];

mount them when they are sufficiently rested and alight from them

before tiring them (Abu Dawud, Abmad).

See the next J:tadith.

161. Do not treat the backs of your beasts as pulpits (Abu Dawud, Ibn

Fjibban).

In other words, do not remain sitting on your mounts for long periods, gossiping, passing
time, or doing something that could be done on the ground. Allow the animals to rest,
and do not exhaust them beyond their limits (Mirqat al-mafattb 7:459).

162. Do not sit between two people except with their permission (Abu

Dawud).

They may be together due to close friendship or they may be engaged in a private discus-
sion and an intrusion would inconvenience them (Mirqilt al-mafattb 8:479).
COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 79

""'.&1 d:.>-\1 (r1r) ·'I ~ ,... , ;. ~"·,.... /

  ..!! · / / ·/ .;.J
     ...-,... ,...--;;:;  ~ .10:;...~~,....

     :t;'~

163. Do not express joy at your brother's calamity lest Allah take pity
on him and afflict you with calamity (Tirmidhl).

164. Fear the pleading prayer of a wronged one, for there is no veil
between it and Allah (Bukhari, Tirmidhl).

"No veil between it and Allah'' means that the supplication is strong and will be promptly
 accepted by Allah. "A wronged one" refers to the one who has been cheated, oppressed,
 or subjugated in some way by another.

165. A man should not be alone with a [marriageable] woman, and a
woman should not travel except with the accompaniment of an unmar-
riageable kinsman (Bukhari, Muslim).

"Mabram" (for men) includes all those who are unmarriageable through blood relation-
 ship, like sister and aunt; through nursing (rat;ia'a), like one's wet nurse; and through
 intermarriage like mother- or grandmother-in-law.

   After the Messenger ofAllah ill'> made this statement, a Companion approached him
 and said, "I have just been recruited for such-and-such battle and my wife has departed
 for the pilgrimage:' The Messenger ~ said, "Go and perform the pilgrimage with your
 wife:' 'Allama Tibi explains that this indicates the preference [of his accompanying
 her and her not venturing alone] over his joining the battle where he could be substi-
 tuted (Mirqat al-mafat'ib 5:387). [A] Another l_ladith states, "No woman should travel
 the distance of a night and day except in the company of an unmarriageable kinsman
 (mabram) (Bukhari, Muslim). Scholars have calculated the distance beyond which a
 woman has to be accompanied by her unmarriageable kinsman or husband as being
48 miles (I:lanafi) to so miles (Shafi'i).
80 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

166. Do not use anything with a soul as a target (Muslim, Ibn Maja).

For instance, it is prohibited to use live animals merely for target practice. Hunting
them for their meat is permissible.

167. Make haste in giving voluntary charity, for calamities cannot pass
by it (Tabaran!, Raz!n).

'Allama Tibi explains that charity functions as a protective shield against calamities
(Mirqat al-mafat!b 4:390). Calamities are either blocked or repelled with one's acts of
charity.

168. Guard against the Hellfire, if even with half a date, and whoever
does not possess that then with a good word (Bukhar!, Muslim).

One should strive to safeguard himselfagainst Hellfire [with any good deed], even ifthis
be by donating half a date in charity. If one does not possess even that, then offering a
needy person words ofkindness, like a promise to assist later or a prayer for them, should
be the least he does. "A good word" can also mean the recitation ofvarious supplications
and remembrances (adhkar) in general (Mirqat al-mafat!b 10:134).

169. Fight the polytheists with your wealth, life, and tongue (Abii Dawiid,

Nasa'!).
Fighting with the "tongue" has been explained as inviting them to Allah Most High,
and revealing the falsehood, confusion, and discrepancies of their beliefs (Mirqat al-
mafatib n7s).
                                                              COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 81

170. Take advantage of five conditions before five others: youth before
old age, good health before illness, prosperity before poverty, free time
before becoming occupied, and life before death (Tirmidhl, Mustadrak).

                            THE IRREGULAR VERB LAYSA

171. The powerful one is not he who overpowers somebody, but the
powerful one is he who restrains himself when angry (Bukhiirl, Muslim).

Through this narration, the Messenger ofAllah~ draws attention away from the worldly
to the spiritual. The one who is able to restrain himself is more powerful because he
has been able to overcome his greatest enemy-his anger and lower self (nafs) (Mirqiit
al-mafiitl/:18:826), [A] after which it becomes easier to overcome all other enemies.

172. The one who turns a wife against her husband or turns a slave
against his master is not of us (Abu Diiwud, Mustadrak).

It is an extremely evil act to turn a wife against her husband in any way, whether by
speaking ill ofhim or prompting her to seek a divorce and separate from him. "Is not of
us" means his character is un-Islamic or he is not a true believer. The same explanation
applies to the following narration and all other Q.adiths in this collection that contain
the words "is not of us:'
82 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

173. One who does not have mercy on our young or respect for our old
and does not enjoin the good and forbid the wrong is not of us (Abu

Dawud, Tirmidhl).

174. A believer is not he who maligns, curses, or is obscene or vulgar

(Tirmidhl).

175. Richness does not come from an abundance of wealth; [true] rich-
ness is the richness of the heart (Bukharf, Muslim).

This is because a person with richness of heart is free from excessive desire for worldly
goods and is focused on the Hereafter. He is content with what his Provider has bestowed
upon him. Conversely, one whose heart is driven by the lust for worldly possessions is
in reality a pauper, even though he possesses much, because his longing for material
wealth forces him to continue desiring more. A poet says:

   Venerable of heart is one who holds fast to contentment (qana'a)
       And does not expose to creation his cover [his needs]
                                                                                (Mirqat al-mafatrb 9:23).

176. A true believer is not he who eats to his fill while his neighbor goes
hungry at his side (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-fman).

[A] Part of being a good believer is that one inquire as to his neighbor's needs and at-
tempt to fulfill them.
                                                  COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 83

177- The [true] maintainer of kinship is not one who merely recipro-
cates. The [true] maintainer is the one who reconciles ties when they
are severed (Bukhar!, Tirmidhl).

A person who maintains a good relationship with kin only if they do is not considered
a true maintainer of ties, because he is only doing so out of reciprocity [hence, he will
not gain the complete reward for it). Allah says, "Nor can goodness and evil be equal.
Repel [evil) with what is better: then will he between whom and you was hatred become
as if he were your friend and intimate" (Qur'an 41:34) (Mirqat al-mafat!l:z 8:659).

q8. A liar is not he who settles disagreements between people and [as
such] speaks well [of them to each other] and conveys good (Bukhar!,

Muslim).
According to one explanation, this l,ladith means leaving out the negative and mention-
ing only the positive aspects of one conflicting party to another in order to reconcile
between them, and not actually fabricating or lying about anything. However, the
stronger opinion is that it is actually permitted to make up and convey a few positive
untruths like praises and desire for reconciliation to each conflicting party about the
other, in order for the greater good of reconciliation. Imam Muslim relates that the
narrator ofthe l,ladith, Umm Kulthiim bint 'Uqba ibn Abi Mu'it, said, "I have not heard
the Messenger i:ll\ grant concessions in the untruths people tell except in three cases:
war, reconciling between people, and a husband's words to his wife and a wife's words
to her husband" (Mirqat al-mafat!/:z 8:795).

                       :~.:U1 ~ fU1 ~ f)f ::; ~ (w~)

179. Nothing is more honored in the sight of Allah than supplication

(Tirmidh!, Ibn Maja).
This is because du'a', "supplication:' is an expression of one's inability, feebleness, and
need and a confession ofthe independence, might, power, and strength ofAllah (Mirqat
al-mafat!/:z 5:13). [A) During du'a', a person truly realizes his position of servitude and
humbles himself to the Master Most High.
84 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                           ~~L5~1~ (,A·)

180. Hearing [about something] is not like seeing [it] (A~mad,

Mustadrak).
After mentioning the above, Allah's Messenger ~ gave the example of when Miisa 'If§\
did not drop the Tablets when Allah Most High informed him of his people engaging
in idolatry, but dropped them in anger only when seeing them in that condition (Mirqat
al-mafati~ 9:732).

181. She who beats her cheeks, rends her garments, and cries out as
people did in pre- Islamic times is not of us (Bukhari, Muslim).

Wailing over one's deceased is prohibited in Islam. However, feeling sadness in the
heart and shedding tears as a natural reaction to the loss is, of course, not prohibited
(Mirqat al-mafati~ 4:207).

                                CoNDITIONAL SENTENCES

                           [BEGINNING WITH MAN]

182. Whoever humbles himself for the sake of Allah, Allah raises him;
and whoever is arrogant, Allah degrades him (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-iman).

'Allama Tlbl explains that the one who considers himself lower than his actual status
and considers others to be superior is elevated by Allah and also becomes elevated
among people (Mirqat al-mafati~ 8:844). [A] Pride and majesty belong to Allah alone.
The Messenger of Allah ~ related that Allah Most High says, "Pride and majesty is my
upper garment and exaltedness is my lower garment. Whoever contends with me for
them, I will enter him into the Hellfire" (Muslim).

   The following l:ladith clearly explains the difference between self-dignity and pride.
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 85

Abu Hurayra ~ relates, "A very handsome man came to the Messenger of Allah ill\. He
said, 'I like beauty and you can see what I have been given of it, and I do not prefer
that anybody excel over me in this regard, even in the matter of a sandal strap. Is this
pride?' The Messenger of Allah ill\ said, 'No. Pride is to reject truth and despise people"'
(Abu Dawud, Al-Adab al-mufrad).

4 1 - F - .....J. 0 ~/ ~0\/ .F;-. 0- ~-.:; ~ ('Af)

183. He who is not grateful to people is not grateful to Allah (Abu Dawud,

Tirmidhi, A~mad).

Allah makes some people a means of blessing for others and commands that in return
the recipients of such blessings express their gratitude. Ifone disobeys this command by
not showing gratitude to the person, then he has not shown gratitude to Allah. Another
explanation is that ifa person cannot be grateful to people for their favors, despite them
being ardently desirous ofgratitude, then how will he be grateful to Alliih, who is above

and free from the need of gratitude? (Mazad al-raghibin ss)

184. For him who directs toward good is the same reward as the doer
of it (Muslim, Tirmidhi).

"Directing" i.e., through speech, action, or written work. "Toward good" i.e., toward
virtuous deeds or the knowledge that leads to such (Mirqat al-mafati~ 1:463). [A] This
 is an easy and simple way of gaining the abundant rewards of Allah and spreading
goodness in the world.

185. Whoever does not ask Allah, Allah becomes angry with him

(Tirmidhi, A~mad).

This refers to a person who fails to invoke Allah, whether it is out of pride or disdain.
Allah says, ''And your Lord says, 'Call on Me; I will answer your (prayer); but those
who are too arrogant to serve Me (i.e., ask Me) will surely enter Hell abased" (Qur'an
40:6o) (Mazad al-raghibin 55).
86 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                 ~   J.  :(i  ~ ~,.~  , ,:::1  ·,  ('Ai)

                                  ,      -            '":-'+'  UA

186. He who plunders is not of us (Abu Dawud, Ibn Maja).

187. Whoever raises a weapon against us is not of us (Bukharz, Muslim).

This includes whether one raises a weapon at another Muslim in jest or to actually strike
him, because neither is befitting the character of a true believer (Mirqat al-mafatib
7:8o).

188. He who keeps silent saves himself (Tirmidhi, Abmad).

Imam AbU I:Iamid al-Ghazall writes, "The dangers of the tongue are great and the
calamities many; for instance, erring, lying, tale bearing, backbiting, ostentation, hy-
pocrisy, vulgarity, arguing, and discussing vice. Despite the dangers, the soul is inclined
toward such calamities. One who falls into them can seldom keep his tongue harnessed,
[therefore one should] only permit it to speak when necessary and prohibit it when
necessary. Thus, there is danger in confronting these calamities, and there is safety in
remaining silent, along with the opportunity one gets to gather one's thoughts, ponder,
reflect, and worship'' (Mirqat al-mafatzb 8:572).

189. Whoever is deprived ofgentleness is deprived of good (Muslim, Abu

Dawud, Ibn Maja).
[A] One who lacks gentleness should strive to inculcate it within himself so as not to
remain deprived of this virtue.

   ~15WI ~_) ~_-; ~ .J:~I &1 ~_-; ~ ~:~1 :j.:.. ~ (,'\·)

190. He who lives in the desert becomes harsh, he who follows game
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS e::::::=J 87

[hunting] becomes negligent, and he who goes to a ruler falls into trials

(Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi, A~mad).

One living in isolated areas, whether it be a desert, forest, or the wilderness, generally
remains ignorant of many aspects oflife, religion, and social interaction, due to being
away from people of knowledge. Thereby, harshness develops in his personality and
character, and the softness of the heart and the desire to perform acts of piety and
virtue are lost.

   In hunting and tracking game, one usually becomes so engrossed in the pursuit
that prayers and other worships are not only missed, but are intentionally neglected. It
leads to heedlessness and can also lead to a decrease in mercy and compassion in the
hunter. Hunting for food, however, is not being discouraged here since it is one of the
necessities oflife for many people.

   With regard to going to a ruler, it is discouraged to approach one if there is no need
to and if flattery is to be employed. If, however, the reason for approaching him is to
advise him, command good, or prohibit from evil (in which case it would be a form
of superior jihad and therefore preferable), or to request a permissible need from him,
then it is allowed to visit him (Mirqat al-mafati~ 7:279).

~  ~
.!.\ / 0;.. 0 ,..,,....  ;.
   ·I ..ili , ·(
   '-!,f.. j "

191. Whoever performs prayers with ostentation has empartnered oth-
ers to Allah; whoever fasts with ostentation has empartnered others to
Allah; and whoever gives in charity with ostentation has empartnered
others to Allah (A~mad).

The term ashraka, "has empartnered others to Allah;' refers to shirk khafi, or "hidden
empartnering" (Mirqat al-mafati~ 9:191). The Messenger of Allah$ said, "The hidden
empartnering is that a person stands to pray and then increases or enhances his prayer
due to observing another watching him" (Ibn Maja).

   [A] Every act of worship should be performed solely for the pleasure of Allah. Any
deed done with ostentation will not be eligible for Allah's reward, and on the Day of
Resurrection such a person will be ordered to beseech those for whom he did the good
deed.
88 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

192. Whoever emulates a group is from them (Abu Dawud, Tabaranf).

This ]:ladith includes the emulation of the unbelievers in clothing, as well as in other
aspects, such as imitating those who transgress the limits of Allah, e.g., actors, dancers,
and singers. However, it also implies that ifone emulates the people of righteousness and
piety, one will be gathered with them in the Hereafter in regard to reward and punish-
ment. 'Allama T!bl considers this ]:ladith to be general and applicable to emulation in
appearance [dress], character, and specific signs of religion (shi'ar). Mulla 'All al-Qari
says it refers to the latter only (Mirqat al-mafatf~ 8:155). [A] 'Allama Tibi's opinion
has been preferred by many scholars because it better exemplifies the unique position
of Islam in everything, especially when strong prohibitions are found in other l_l.adiths
regarding the emulation ofother religions, such as in dress, like tying the turban without
a hat, and in appearance, like the shortening of the beard (see l_l.adith 151).

                                 ',..::_:~\~ !~i1  ;  d  :0-"~  (,1\r)

                                 ~~-                  J

193. Whoever intends to perform the pilgrimage should make haste in
doing so (Abu Dawud, Ibn Maja, Mustadrak).

A person who has the means to make the pilgrimage should fulfill his obligation as soon
as possible-as the benefits ofthe pilgrimage are great and there is no guarantee ofone's
living until the next ~ajj season. For a person to delay performing the pilgrimage once
it has become obligatory is considered by many scholars, such as Imam Abu Yiisuf and
the majority ofi:Ianafi scholars, to be a sin. Other opinions in this regard include those
oflmam Mul_l.ammad al-Shaybani and Imam Shafi'I. The former stated that a person
would be sinning if he delayed its performance and then died without performing it,
while the latter asserted that one would be sinning if he continued to delay despite fear-
ing that he would not be able to perform it later (Mirqat al-majatf~ 5:397).

194. Whoever equips a fighter in the path of Allah has also taken part
in the fighting, and whoever looks after a fighter's family when he is
away has also taken part in the fighting (Bukharf, Muslim).
COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 89

~ , ~  _;...·I;  ~, (";.f'' /~J/ (·/.'r/         d'oo)
          ·
                                                 '\.

195. Whoever turns away from my Sunna is not from me (Bukhari,

Muslim).

To "turn away;' includes doing so out of disdain or contempt, but not just out oflaziness.
People who show contempt or disdain for even a single practice of Allah's Messenger
~ that has been rigorously authenticated and classified as being from his Sunna are
among the people who have turned away from the Messenger's Sunna [and thus the
Messenger~ himself] (Mirqat al-mafatib 1:375).

196. Whoever deceives us is not of us (Muslim).

197. Whoever consoles a bereaved mother will be garbed in a special
garment in Paradise (Tirmidhi).

                     ~I~\) t_f. ~ ~~~ :˘!.;. ('~A)

198. Whoever kills a person with whom there is a covenant will not
smell the fragrance of Paradise (Bukhari).

[A] For instance, a non-Muslim visiting or residing in a land governed by Islamic rule
with whom there is an accord.

199. Whoever constructs a mosque for Allah, Allah will construct for
him a house in Paradise (Bukhari, Muslim).

The condition for gaining reward by building a masjid is that it be done for the sake of
Allah, and not for one's own fame or personal gain. Another narration adds that "even
if it be as the nest of a sand grouse" (Abmad, Ibn Maja). This means that even if the
90 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

contribution to the masjid is small [for instance, donating a small amount of money,
time, bricks, or some fixtures], it will be rewarded with a house in Paradise (Mirqat
al-mafatll; 2:401).

""  0  , , . . ..... ,.,  0!       0         ,..... /      .....  rl{ )
~G ~ ~G~ ~~IfY. ~ ~~.)I~ ~ ~J'·· ;;;;
          0lS t;;..UI                        0lS

200. Whoever is two-faced in the world will have two tongues of fire
on the Day of Judgment (Abu Dawud, Darimf).

To be two-faced is to act as a sympathizer toward each of two enemies and to speak ill
of one to the other (Mirqat al-mafattb 8:591).

                                p     .....            "'
    J.P J.P 1~ ~ .&1 oi:-I.J ~ ~ (r.,) <JS 0/_,.-;;;

201. Whoever sends a blessing (salutation) upon me, Allah sends ten
blessings upon him (Muslim).

The meaning of Allah sending blessings upon a person is that He showers him with
His mercy. However, a servant may receive, depending on the love, fervor, and devo-
tion with which he or she made the salutation, much more than ten blessings. Another
narration in Sunan al-Nasa'l adds, "By it Allah will [also] remove from the suppliant
ten sins and raise his rank ten degrees [in Allah's sight]" (Mirqat al-mafatib po-u).
The word ~alawat, "salutations;' means more than sending blessings. Scholars explain
that it also includes honoring and praising someone, making a good mention of them,
elevating their status, and expressing love for them-all of which apply in the case of
Allah sending salutations on His Messenger (Ma'arif al-badlth 5:354).

202. For whomever Allah intends good, He grants him deep under-
standing of religion (Islam) (Bukharf).

An intimate understanding of religion does not only include the knowledge of Islamic
law (which is whatfiqh technically refers to), but includes the knowledge ofthe spiritual
path (tarlqa) and the Divine Reality (baqiqa). Darimi relates that once I:Iasan [al-Ba~ri]
exclaimed, "Have you ever seen afaqih (jurist)? Afaqih is one who exercises abstinence
                                                              COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 91

from the world (zuhd), is a seeker of the Hereafter, is insightful in the matters of his
religion, and is regular in his worship to his Lord" (Mirqat al-majatl/:!1:450).

  :BI ~ ~f :ill 1~ :t1 ~lj;;- ~~ Jw j_J~ 9!C:.;,:;. ('l'·i)

203. Whoever receives a favor and says to the doer, "May Allah grant
you a good reward;' has excelled in his appreciation (Nasa'!, Tirmidhl).

This individual excels in his appreciation because he has confessed his inability to suf-
ficiently praise or reward the giver of the favor and has entrusted it to Allah to give
him a more complete reward (Mirqat al-mafatl/:1 6:213).

               ~;.J~.;; ~f ;;5 5L5 ~j..:j ~~~ LSt~ _; ('l'·i)

204. Whoever notices [another's] fault and conceals it is like one who
brings back to life a female child that was buried alive (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi,

Ibn Ifibban).

"[... ] is like the one...;' the similarity being that for some people, the embarrassment
 and shame they feel at having their secrets revealed or matters of confidence exposed
 is no less than death. Therefore, one who comes upon something of this and keeps it
concealed (for instance, covering an exposed part of someone's body or concealing a
 defect) acts as if he were keeping the person alive (Mirqat al-majatl/:18:717). [A] It is
 not blameworthy, however, to inform people of a deceitful person, for instance, telling
 people not to give a certain "poor man" their charity ($adaqa) because he is a scam
 artist trying to take advantage of their generosity.

fY. ~~/ ~  ~  ;.   /US'~ ;:;; //U;:;S; '/ :;.:;-/ ~~~  :;.  ~ ,..,......  ~~ .....  /  /

              .&1                                      .&1                          0j:>-:;.  ('\'·o)

                                J:-9 Jl ~~0~.&.J. I /       .....         /     ~...... GI _;:; -~9110

                                                             .&I
                                                            ,.,... .....                      ..... /
                                                                             /            /

205. Whoever guards his tongue, Allah will conceal his faults. Whoever

restrains his anger, Allah will withhold His punishment from him on

the Day ofJudgment. And whoever apologizes to Allah [beseeching His

forgiveness], Allah will accept his apology (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-fman).

According to 'Allama Tlbl, "guards his tongue" refers to concealing the faults of others.
92 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

In lieu of this, Allah will except his excuse and reward him for having overlooked the
faults ofothers in this world (Mirqat al-mafati~ 8:844). [A] As encouraged in this l).adtth,
one should be forbearing and forgiving of others' faults in the hope that Allah be the
same with one's own faults.

         i~ ;.;~, ~~if~ ~ ~:.; ~:;. ""'...- /
         rY. ;S JlJ; ?                                    (r·l)
               /         ,~-     \  .....           /  /

         ~                                       ~

206. Whoever is asked about some [religious] matter of which he has

knowledge, but withholds it, he will be bridled with fire on the Day of

Judgment (Abu Dawud, Ibn Maja).

Ibn I;Iajar al-'Asqalani states, "One should acquire sacred knowledge for benefiting
and spreading to others. Ifone withholds it, then the primary objective ofacquiring the
knowledge is lost. His state is thus far from that oftrue scholars [who are always convey-
ing their knowledge];' and he is punished with a bridle of fire in his mouth since that is
from where he withheld disseminating the knowledge (Mirqat al-mafatl~ 1:481).

         0r ~~.:ill~_;.~~) ;J~;~ ~r ~ )Gt :;..; (r·v)
            /     .....             fill' ,....

207. Whoever advises his brother concerning a matter, knowing that

correct guidance lies in another direction, has betrayed him (Abu

Dawud).

[A] "Betrayed him;' i.e., betrayed his brother's trust in advising him to adopt a path of
misguidance instead of guidance. Giving advice in a way which causes one's brother
to adopt the wrong path in any matter is not a characteristic suited for a believer. See
l).adiths 81 and 196.

208. One who adorns himself with something he was not given is like
the one who puts on two garments of falsehood (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhl).

The garments signify two lies, because this statement was made to a woman who asked
if she could falsely claim before a co-wife [in the case of a plural marriage] that her
husband had satisfied her in some way [for instance, by giving her something] when
he had not. Hence, one lie would be for her to say that he had given her something
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 93

and the other lie would be to insinuate that the husband possesses more love for her.
This ]:ladith also refers to a person who adorns himself in the guise of an ascetic, saint,
scholar, or the like, to deceive people (Mirqat al-mafati}:t 6:212).

209. For him who holds fast to my Sunna at the corruption ofmy Umma
is the reward of a hundred martyrs (Bayhaqi, Al-Zuhd).

"Corruption" here refers to when an atmosphere of innovation, ignorance, or transgres-
 sion becomes prevalent. Because this person's struggle and burden is in reviving the
 Sunna of Allah's Messenger ~' he has been likened to a martyr whose struggle lies on
 reviving the faith itself (Mirqat al-mafati}:t 1:422).

210. Whoever bears witness that there is no deity except Allah
and Mu}:lammad is His Messenger, Allah prohibits Hellfire on him

(Muslim).

Testimony in there being "no deity except Allah'' entails that one believe and adhere
to everything that has been revealed from Allah, and testimony in "Mu]:lammad is His
Messenger" entails accepting what has been established from him ;j.. "Allah prohibits
Hellfire on him" means that he will not remain therein [forever] even if he is initially
sent there to be purified of sins he committed in his life (Mirqat al-mafati}:t 1:200).

r-l: A ~8i~ ;_; ~' ~~ 5L5                             ~i~ ;_; (r,,)
                                                  "~

211. Whoever is given a legal ruling (jatwii) without knowledge, then

the sin is on the one who issued it (Abu Dawud).

A jurist, or mufti, sins if he issues a ruling without sufficient knowledge, but the ques-
tioner does not, because the responsibility of the uninformed questioner is only to ask
the people of knowledge [as Allah commands: "Ask the people of reminder if you do
not know" (Qur'an 16:43)]. Some have explained that the sin falls on the questioner
too, since he placed an incompetent person in a position of juridical authority [for
 94 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

 instance, if he did not do enough to verify his scholarship] (Mirqat al-mafiit!/:!I:S03).
 See also part 21_ladith 23.

212. Whoever honors a person responsible for reprehensible innovations
has assisted in undermining Islam (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-zman).

 [A] By these words, one can easily sense the severity ofthe crime and sin ofthe innova-
 tor. See the next I_J.adith.

213. Whoever innovates something reprehensible in this matter ofours
that does not belong to it is rejected (Bukhiir!, Muslim).

"In this matter;' i.e., religion-Islam. Defining "innovation;' Qa<Ji 'Iya<,i writes, "Whoever
 innovates an opinion in Islam that does not have any manifest (:;;iihir) or obscure (khafi)
 or clear or derived substantiation from the Qur'an and Sunna, then it is rejected:'

    Islam was perfected as a religion, and anyone who attempts to bring into it an unsub-
 stantiated idea has undertaken a disliked practice-disliked because ofthe implication
 that Islam is incomplete or defective, and hence has need for some innovation. As for
 the words "that does not belong to it;' they indicate that innovating something that is in
 accordance with the Qur'an and Sunna (i.e., "which belongs to it") cannot be considered
 reprehensible. Imam Shafi'i said, "Any innovation that violates the Qur'an or Sunna or
 a statement [of the Companion-athar] or the consensus (ijmii') [of Muslim scholars]
 is a deviance. And whatever good that has been innovated and does not contravene any
 of the above is not reprehensible" (Mirqiit al-mafiiti/:11:366, 368).

   Thus, according to Islamic law, bid'a is any new way in worship that is done with the
intention of attaining more reward, but not proven from the words or the actions-ex-
plicit or tacit-of the Messenger ilt. or the four caliphs, Abu Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, and
'Ali~' in spite of them having had the ability to do so (Shatabi, Al-I'ti~iim).

   The Messenger of Allah~ strongly warned his Umma against innovating something
into Islam saying, "When a people innovate something new into their religion, a sunna
 to that amount is lifted from them. Hence, holding fast to a sunna is superior to in-
troducing a new innovation (A/:lmad). This is why extreme caution is required in the
issue of bid'a. When there is doubt about whether or not something is a reprehensible
                                                  COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 95

 innovation, it is superior to leave the action. Ibn 'Abid!n, the great Syrian jurist, writes,
"When there is confusion between the ruling of something being a sunna or bid'a, it is
 preferable that one abandon the [possible] sunna than enact the [possible] innovation"
(Radd al-mubtar 1:431).

   New methods invented to fulfill human needs have nothing to do with bid'a, be-
cause they are not introduced as an act of worship or with the intention of earning
 reward. Hence, they are permissible as long as they do not violate any command of
 the Sharl'a.

   It can also be understood from the above explanation of bid'a that many things
 that were not needed in the time of Allah's Messenger ii!J!;, but were established later
 to achieve a religious objective, cannot be included in the realm of bid'a (in the legal
 sense) either, [even though they may be considered bid'a in the literal sense, i.e., "an
innovation" or "something new:' Many times the latter is intended when referencing
a certain matter to be a good or bad bid'a, since every action legally considered a bid'a
can only be reprehensible].

    Some innovations that do not violate the Qur'an or the Sunna include the estab-
 lishment of madrasas with their organized curricula and classrooms and centers and
 institutions for spreading Islam (da'wa). Also included among these commendable
 innovations is the codification of sciences like Arabic grammar, syntax, etymology,
 rhetoric, and literature to better understand and interpret the Qur'an and ]:lad!th; the
 study of philosophy [or other relevant subjects] to repudiate heretical groups; and the
 use of certain modern weapons for the defense of Muslims.

    Examples of [legally] reprehensible innovation include [unnecessary] decoration of
mas}ids or the custom of shaking hands after prayers. Mulla 'All al-Qarl writes, "Some
of our scholars [i.e., the I:Ianafi scholars] have explicitly mentioned that it [shaking
 hands after prayer] is disliked, and for this reason it is from among the reprehensible
 innovations (Mirqat al-mafatlb 1:368, see also Radd al-mu}Jtar 5:244). [A] Conversely,
 one must also be cautious ofignorantly labeling something, which may be recommended
or permissible, as a bid'a, since that is also detrimental to the faith.

214. Whoever guarantees for me [the correct use] of that which is be-
tween his jaws [tongue] and that which is between his thighs [private
part], I guarantee for him Paradise (Bukhari).

Therefore, if a believer guards himself against unworthy speech, consuming the unlawful,
96 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

and fornication [and all prelims and extensions to such), then he is guaranteed Paradise
(Mirqiit al-mafiitt/:t 8:559) .

             ,........           \                 .....  ..... ..... ,....
01;.~1 ~~ ~ ;l:~J ;l:~ij ;l:~ij ;l: ~i:; (r,o) ..... /0.....0                /

215. Whoever loves for the sake of Allah and hates for the sake of Allah
and gives for the sake of Allah and denies for the sake of Allah has
completed his faith (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi).

In essence, a person must do everything for the sake of Allah. The reason for the four
things mentioned in the l;ad!th is that human desire and caprice play a big part in
them. Hence, if a person is able to love, hate, give, and deny for the sake of Allah, then
he should be able to do so in ot)ler deeds too (Mirqiit al-mafiitt/:t 1:197). [A) There is no
doubt that the majority of our dealings and interactions in this world revolve around
the acts ofloving, hating, giving, and denying. Hence, ifwe can exercise control in these
aspects and remain steadfast in our love and fear ofAllah, then we would have covered
many aspects of our faith.

                        ~ 0 .J.  ;;;; ,.,...,....         /                  / .....
             ~ ~ 41 ill:.i::; 2~ _,i 1_:;../ ;~ ~i:; (r,,)

216. Whoever defers the debt ofa poverty-stricken person or remits his
payment, Allah will grant him room in His shade (Muslim).

One opinion assumes this phrase to be figurative only, in that a person will be saved
from the heat and torments of that Day. Tlbl has explained it more in the literal sense,
saying that Allah will give him a place in His shade [on the Day when there will be no
shade except that of Allah] (Mirqiit al-mafiitt/:t 6:116).

217. Whoever leaves home to seek sacred knowledge is on the path of
Allah until he returns (Tirmidhi, Diirimf).

In leaving home for seeking sacred knowledge, one revives the religion, humiliates Sa-
tan, and places a burden on himself by engaging in the endeavor, just as a warrior does
when in jihad-hence, the student is "on the path of Allah until he returns" (Mirqiit
al-mafiitt/:t 1:479).
                                                   COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 97

218. Whoever misses the Friday prayer without any legitimate excuse
will be recorded a hypocrite in a book that is never deleted nor changed

(Shafi'!, Musnad).
The record is not erased unless a person repents for having committed the sin (Mirqat
al-mafatib 3:470). [A] Warnings of this nature must not be misconstrued to be time-
 specific or only related to the Companions d,l˘ or people of a particular period. Rather,
 they apply in all times. Aside from valid excuses, such as travel, severe weather condi-
 tions, or illness, being a student, a busy entrepreneur, or in any similar vocation does
 not constitute a valid excuse to miss any obligatory prayer, let alone the Friday prayer.
 See also }:!ad!th 48.

219. Whoever does not abandon false utterances and practicing upon
it [while fasting], Allah cares not that the person abandon his food and
drink (Bukhari).

"False utterances" here refers to all verbal sins, which include, but are not limited to, lying,
 giving false evidence, cursing, engulfing oaths, slandering, backbiting, and reviling.
"False practices" refers to deceptive, immoral, and sinful practices. "Then Allah cares
 not..." because the purpose of fasting is not simply to deprive oneself of nourishment,
 but rather to acquire purity and control of one's desires [the evil-inciting self, the
 unbridled soul which by its very nature directs its owner toward every wrong act]. If
 one's fast does not deter one from evil and shameful deeds, then it is deficient and not
 looked upon by Allah with appreciation (Mirqiit al-mafatlb 4:491).

220. Whoever intentionally lies about me should take his seat in Hellfire

 (Bukhiirl, Muslim).
 [A] A great deal of scrupulousness is required in attributing something to the Mes-
 senger ~ for the simple reason that whatever he says is from Allah and comprises the
 religion of a Muslim. Hence, a person would inadvertently be attributing falsehood to
Allah if he related something from the Messenger ~ knowing it not to be from him.
98 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Out of scrupulousness, Companions such as Ibn Mas'iid ~ would hesitate to say "the
Messenger~ said such-and-such" when relating a J:tadith, and would rather attribute
the statement to themselves.

221. Whoever gives the call to prayer for seven years seeking reward,
immunity from Hellfire will be written for him (Tirmidhz, Ibn Maja).

[A] "Seven years'' is mentioned to denote a plurality of years, because the number
indicates an interval of time spanning across years.

222. Whoever dies not having fought in jihad or having considered it
in his heart, has died on a degree of hypocrisy (Muslim).

This narration refers to one who has never contemplated the issue ofjihad in his mind
or has contemplated it but resolved not to fulfill the responsibility if it ever arose. It is
a "degree of hypocrisy" because it resembles the practice of the hypocrites during the
time of the Messenger~ of either trailing behind the Muslim army (Mirqat al-mafatzb
7:377) [A] or departing with them, but deserting them at a critical moment in the battle
in order to weaken them.

223. Whoever wears clothes of fame in the world, Allah will dress him
in clothes of humiliation on the Day of Judgment (Abu Dawud, Ibn Maja,

Abmad).
This applies to any form of clothing worn to express a sense of pride or arrogance or to
mislead others into believing one is a saint, scholar, jurist, or some other distinguished
personality. However, one who humbles himself [in appearance and otherwise] will be
honored on the Day of Judgment (Mirqat al-mafatzb 8:154).
                                                 COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS f:::::::""9 99

224. Whoever seeks sacred knowledge to vie with scholars, argue with
fools, or capture public notice, Allah will enter him into Hellfire (Tirmidhi,

Ibn Miija).
[A] The reason for entry into Hellfire is his corrupt intention in acquiring such valuable
knowledge and the pride, arrogance, futile debating, and argumentation that follows
his attainment of this knowledge. And Allah knows best.

225. Whoever seeks that knowledge by which the pleasure of Allah is
sought [sacred knowledge] only to acquire some worldly gain, he will
not smell the fragrance of Paradise on the Day ofJudgment (Abu Dawud,

Ibn Maja, A~mad).

It is related that l:fasan al-Ba~rl (may Allah be pleased with him) once saw a man
performing some tricks atop a hill and said, "He is better than some of our colleagues
(a~~ab), for he is earning the [possessions of this] world with [feats of] this world,
whereas our colleagues acquire this world with religion:'

  While it is impermissible to do the work of the Hereafter for acquiring possessions
of this world [such as teaching }:tadith to win the hearts of men], it is not blameworthy,
according to the scholars, to acquire this world [in a lawful way] to free oneself for
the work of the Hereafter. "He will not smell..." has been considered an exaggeration
for deterring one from following such a path and scholars have not taken it literally
(Mirqat al-majaa~ 1:483).

'Y. ""'  ;;;  ~ :~:;. o_j. r:;; o _....  /  lj\~ ""' ?
oYLP :.J J;Z :.Jb .;i;; ~ ~~i ?""' '                    ',....

                                                                (ni)

226. Whoever visits a fortune- teller and asks him about something, his
prayer will not be accepted for forty nights (Muslim).
100 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

This refers to one who believes in what he is told by a fortune-teller, as opposed to one
who asks deridingly or with the intention to expose the fortune-teller. The general
warning in this l:Jad!th discourages visits to a fortune-teller or [psychic or palmist] for
any reason (Mirqiit al-mafiit1~ 8:362), [A) unless it is for the sake of enjoining good or
other virtuous reasons. "Prayer will not be accepted" means there will be no reward for
it, although the obligation will be absolved.

                                                                      Jl:,.... ,.. o,.., o,.... ,.... I

                                         ~~L!lS ~ 0i i.JJ J;-

227. Whoever seeks refuge of you in the name of Allah, grant it to him.
Whoever asks of you in the name of Allah, give to him. Whoever gives
you an invitation, accept it. And whoever does you a good turn, repay
him. If you are unable to find something by which to return the favor,
supplicate for him until you think you have repaid him (Abu Dawud,

Nasii'f, A~mad).
If there are no juridical reasons for refusing an invitation [for instance, being served
from predominantly unlawful wealth or some other unlawful activity taking place), then
you should accept it. "Supplicate for him until you think you have repaid him" entails
that one supplicate for the person over and over again until he feels he has repaid the
person (Mirqiit al-mafiit1~ 4:430).

228. He among you who sees a wrongdoing should rectify it with his
hands; if he is unable to do this then by speech; and if he is unable to
do [either] then with his heart, and that is the weakest degree offaith

(Muslim, Tirmidhl).
One "who sees" refers to one who has clear insight into the lawful, unlawful, and differed
                                                             COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 101

upon, etc. Rectifying with one's hands could be by destroying unlawful instruments,
spilling an unlawful drink, or returning usurped property to its rightful owner. "By
speech" refers to giving advice, admonishment, or mentioning the warnings and dan-
gers ofsomething. Furthermore, the act of"rectifying" becomes obligatory (jarrj) ifthe
wrongdoing is of the unlawful (~ariim) degree, and recommended (mandub) if it is of
the undesirable (makruh) degree. Having said this, the above applies when there is no
fear of creating a greater problem or prolonging one (see Mirqiit al-majiifi~ 8:86o).

229. Whoever misses a fast of Rama<;lan without any valid excuse or
illness, then even if he fasts for a whole lifetime it will not atone for the
[missed] fast (Tirmidh1, Abu Diiwud).

This refers to the reward and virtue of a fast of Rama<).an being unattainable once it is
lost. The obligation of the missed fast, however, will be absolved by fasting a day in its
place (Mirqiit al-mafiitl~ 4:509).

230. He who obeys me obeys Allah, and he who disobeys me disobeys
Allah. He who obeys the leader obeys me, and he who disobeys the
leader disobeys me (Bukhiiri, Muslim).

The Quraysh were not in the custom of listening to or obeying anyone but their own
tribal leaders. Hence, the issuance of the above statement by the Messenger ~: that
obeying the appointed leader ofthe Muslims is part ofobeying Allah and His Messenger
ii;1. (Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 7:244).
102 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                                                                                              ,.... j.  ,.... /
                                                                                                      ~.&l~i

                                                                                                      ~

231. Whoever acquires goods from people intending to repay them,

Allah will [help him] repay [them]; and whoever takes [them] with

the thought of squandering them, then Allah will destroy his property

(Bukharl).

''Allah will [help him] repay" the loan in this world or will satisfy the creditor in the
 Hereafter on behalf of the debtor. ''Allah will destroy his property" and will not grant
 him blessing in his wealth (Mirqat al-majatl/:l6:I22).

232. Whoever feeds a fasting person or equips a warrior in jihad receives
the same reward as them (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-zman).

                                                               ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~.);o _,. ~             ,..  _..,..
""'             \ ·~~~·~~o i~-J"!4.~.J.                 ,....       ,.... P ,....
                                                 ,....
                                                                   0
                                                                       ·

                                                               "" .....
· · oi u....:.:. J>.i (rrr) Jl 'l!l : ,..., 00~                                                               ~~
C:::' " ~.)                                                                                0  ~               j.-4
     /                                                                                 ·

                                                                                   ,....

233. Whoever takes any portion ofland without right will be swallowed

up in seven earths on the Day of Judgment (Bukharl).

This indicates that the plain of Resurrection will consist of seven layers (Mirqat al-
majatl/:l 6:156) and warns of the severity of the punishment for the one who takes the
land of others without right.

234. Whoever sees me in a dream has genuinely seen me, because Satan
cannot take my form (Bukharl, Muslim).

In another narration, the Messenger of Allah ~ said, "Whoever sees me has indeed
seen the truth" (Bukharl, Muslim). This means it is a true dream from Allah the Ex-
alted, and not from the insinuations of Satan. Such a dream is [normally) a source of
glad tidings for the one who sees it, and he may act in accordance with what he sees
[unless he sees the Messenger llJ!, in an unfamiliar state, in which case it is still a true
                                                            COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 103

dream, but he must now seek an interpretation from those qualified in the science of
dream interpretation]. A person does not qualify as a Companion (~abiibl) by seeing

*' the Messenger in his dream.

   Imam Nawawi states that it is possible for more than one person to see the Messenger

*' in their dreams at the same time, and it is truly him that they are seeing. However,

sometimes a person may see other peculiar details [or see the Messenger ~ in a form
other than what has been related of him]. These things, which would require scholarly
interpretation, would be considered the influences of one's personal thoughts, feelings,
and sentiments-for instance, a person may see the Messenger ~ with a completely
white beard [whereas he was related to have a full black beard with just a few white
hairs in it, or he may see him in the appearance of some pious person known to the
person] (Mirqiit al-mafiitib 8:378-381).

   One of the reasons why Satan cannot come in the form ofthe Messenger iill\ is so that
the absolute truth remains the truth and falsehood remains clear and that there be no
confusion between the two. The Messenger of Allah~ is a figure of complete guidance
and truth, whereas Satan is in essence a figure of deception and falsehood. As such, they
can never come together and mix in any way.

235. Whoever claims something not belonging to him is not of us, and
let him take his seat in Hellfire (Muslim).

This severe warning applies when one "claims something not belonging to him'' while
knowing that it is not his (Mirqiit al-mafiittb 7:334). This does not apply if one is genu-
inely under the false impression that it belongs to him.

fl.! c,;.:; f.JZ 41 -::;.1.:; ........... /.J.              /  l?j/~! 0/ ~:/ :; r~:;.  J{            )
      /  ;i~ ~ 0,.....  -:;; ...... ,  ~ ~ ~ .,......                                  ~"·r,

ll;J

                                       ~~ ~ r~ ~ j :;1. 4~1; G'Q1 JJiJ1
                                       .... ,          ""'     .....  /                ,.....,.....

236. Whoever fasts the month of Rama<;ian with belief and seeking re-

ward, his previous sins will be forgiven; and whoever spends the Night

of Qadr [Power, Destiny] standing in prayer with faith and seeking

reward, his previous sins will be forgiven (Bukhiirl, Muslim).
 104 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

"His previous sins:' i.e., minor sins and possibly his major sins too (Mirqat al-mafiiti~
4:444).

                           ..... ~ ,... / /         JI lia
4'\ lil;.! flj!; ~~ ~ f~ ~ 4.1 ~ 0,......-;;;,..... /,,.....;......
                           ~ :.;_I_J 0L,a;)         ~J'r'VF

237. Whoever spends Rama<;lan standing [in prayer] with faith and
seeking reward, his previous sins will be forgiven (Bukharl, Muslim).

The act of "standing" refers to performing the Tariiwl~ prayer or circumambulating
(tawaj) the Ka'ba if one is in Makka (Mirqat al-mafiitl~ 4A44).

238. Whoever eats from this foul smelling plant [onion plant] should
not come near our mosques, because the angels are troubled by what
humans are troubled by (Bukharl, Muslim).

[A] Included in this prohibition are all other unpleasant odors, such as those emanat-
ing from the mouth of one who ate garlic, leek, or tobacco, or a foul stench emanating
from one who has sweated profusely.

239. Whoever is appointed a judge among the people has been slaugh-
tered without a knife (Abu Diiwud, Tirmidhl, Ibn Miija).

[A] Upon being appointed a judge, a person is usually confronted with two situations: to
rule as honestly and justly as possible in conformance with the commands and laws of
Allah-and risk resentment and hate from people-or pass judgments in their favor by
overlooking the laws of the Shari'a-and face the wrath of Allah in this world and the
next. This means that he is caught in a very delicate situation and has to decide which
of these two situations is more beneficial [obviously the former, but temptations such
as power and greed can often cloud judgment if not remedied from the heart]. For this
reason, being "appointed a judge among the people" has been explained in such a grave
                                                            COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 105

manner by the Messenger of Allah~' because to be slaughtered without a knife (e.g.,
with a blunt instrument) is far more painful than being slaughtered with a knife.

                                                        / / 0; 0,..,...  ;t1  ~.... ..... a/ ;.~  (n·)

                                                        :J _,.z1..w

240. Whoever swears an oath by other than Allah has ascribed partners
with Allah (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhl).

Swearing by other than a name or attribute of Allah is impermissible, whether it is
done in the name ofthe Messenger il\JI, the Ka'ba, the angels, life, spirit, etc. This type of
swearing constitutes shirk since it is done in reverence to something or someone other
than Allah Most High (Mirqat al-mafatil:z 6:280, 593).

iJj1_; 44 f.r.~5L5 ~-' .:~:;. f~ y:-~1 i Jj1_; 44f.r.~5L5 ~ (ri')
/  ,.... ,.... ,....                    /          ,...,.... /           ,.... ,.... /

   ~~Ji/              J~J ~0
   r: ..:_:                                     0
          1::;;               ~'110  i             ;t~  ~~      5L5      ~j   .~)~      ~~  ~            0
                                        _J;jlj
                                                                                                     '11

                                     /                                                            /

241. Whoever has faith in Allah and the Last Day should be hospitable

to his guest; whoever has faith in Allah and the Last Day should not

trouble his neighbor; and whoever has faith in Allah and the Last Day

should either speak what is good or remain silent (Bukhari, Muslim).

In this ]:ladith, three virtuous acts are mentioned, each one after the statement "Whoever
has faith in Allah and the Last Day;' because by these actions a person reaches perfection
in faith. Hence, abandoning them would not constitute disbelief. Hospitality to a guest
is fulfilled by cheerfulness, pleasant talk, and feeding them for three days-the first day
[with complete preparation and organization] according to one's ability and capacity,
and for the two remaining days, the guest should be fed with whatever is available [at
home] without any added formality (takalluf), so as not to inconvenience the host or
guest. Once three days have elapsed, hospitality is considered a voluntary charity-he
[the host] can do it if he so wishes, otherwise it is not necessary (Mirqat al-mafatil:z
8:68). See also ]:ladith 124 and 188.
106 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

242. If anyone performs the night ('Isha') prayer in congregation, it is
as though he has spent half the night standing in prayer, and if anyone
performs the morning (Fajr) prayer in congregation, it is as though he
has spent the whole night in prayer (Muslim).

[A] Whoever has difficulty waking in the latter part of the night for Tahajjud (night
vigil) prayer should at least perform the 'Isha and Fajr prayers in congregation.

243. Whoever's actions set him back, his ancestry will not hasten him
forward (Muslim, Abu Diiwud).

Allah says, "Verily the most honored ofyou in the sight of Allah is (he who is) the most
righteous of you" (Qur'an 49:13). When a person's deeds set him back from gaining
proximity to Allah, his lineage will not propel him forward (Mirqiit al-mafiit!~ 1:457).

244. Whoever sincerely asks Allah for martyrdom, Allah will elevate
him to the ranks of martyrs, even if he dies on his bed (Muslim).

(A] This l,ladith further emphasizes the importance of having sincerity in all one's acts
of worship to Allah Most High. One receives a reward similar to that of one who died
striving in the path of Allah (martyr) just for desiring and supplicating for it with
sincerity.

                                          :;~~j5~!; (no)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                /

245. Whoever has hair should groom it (Abu Dawud).

It is recommended for one to keep the hair of his head clean and groomed, especially if
it is long. The Messenger ofAllah ill\ would oil and comb his hair regularly (see Tirmidhi,
Al-Shamii'il al-Mu~ammadiyya).
                                                             COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 107

246. He who performs the pilgrimage for Allah without engaging in
immodest talk or transgression will return [free from sin] as on the day
his mother gave him birth (Bukhari, Muslim).

                                           0  0                                     ,.......     J/
                                           / i y.. ~/ //~ ~ ~L:iJ\ .--o....- ~~':o· ~o.,.....,.... ~o.,....,-

                                                                                      Y.J JJJ

247. Whoever rears a horse for use in the path of Allah with faith in
Allah and trust in His promise, then its food, drink, dung, and urine
will all be in his scale on the Day of Judgment (Bukhiiri).

[A] Allah's rewarding the believers for their rearing a horse in preparation for war
(physical jihad) is yet another example of Allah's tremendous bounty for those who
strive for Him, Glorified and Exalted is He.

MORE CONDITIONAL SENTENCES [BEGINNING WITH lDHA]

[.,..~ ~ti .!J~~-:. ~;L._:; ~ ~~ l~t (nA)

/                                                                                             /

248. When your good deeds make you happy and your bad deeds make

you sad, then you are a believer (A~mad).

The reason for these feelings is that a complete believer is able to distinguish between
good and bad deeds, and believes in being recompensed for them in the Hereafter; as
opposed to a disbeliever who is not able to make this distinction and is heedless oftheir
consequences (Mirqiit a/-majiifi~ 1:213).

249. When leadership is handed to an incompetent person, then await
the Final Hour (Bukhari).
 108 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

"Incompetent person" refers to one in whom the juridical conditions ofleadership are
 not present, such as a child, coward, unlearned person, miser, transgressor, or woman
 [though some women may be physically capable to lead, they would have to abandon
 certain feminine qualities in order to take up such positions, along with the fact that
 the Messenger of Allah ilil\ said, "A people who entrust their rule to a woman will not
 be successful" (Bukharl) ]. This is not confined to leadership ofan Islamic caliphate, but
 also to positions of imama, oration, judiciary, etc. [although a woman is permitted to
 be a judge in matters pertaining to women].

    The reason for this statement is that a desert Arab approached the Messenger ofAllah
~and asked him when the Final Hour would be. The Messenger Jl\1'. replied, "When trust
 is lost, then await the Final Hour:' He then asked how trust will be lost, so the Messenger
 of Allah il\ll made the above statement. The reason it is a sign of the Final Hour is that
 such leadership leads to corruption, defective rule, breakdown of Islamic institutions,
 and weakness in the establishment oflslamic laws (Mirqat al-mafattb 9:334).

250. When Allah destines for a person to die at a particular place, He
creates a need for him to be there (Tirmidhz, Abmad).

Therefore, a person travels to a place for a particular reason, unaware that it is his pre-
 destined place of death, and dies there. Allah says, "Nor does anyone know in what
 land he is to die" (Qur'an 31:34) (Mirqat al-mafatlb 1:312).

251. When you dress and when you perform ablution, begin with your
right side (Abu Dawud, Abmad).

 [A] It is more meritorious to start all virtuous undertakings with the right side. See
 Q.adiths 257 and 258.

             ~~Jj~ (_j~l ~~ ~~ 1fo~ rl~\ e~ I~! (ror)

252. When food is placed, take off your footwear for it is more com-
fortable for your feet (Darim!, Mustadrak).
                                                            COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS ~ 109

[A] The noble practice ofthe Messenger of Allah~ was to sit on the floor and eat. Hence,
the removal offootwear in this position was recommended in order to facilitate a more
comfortable sitting position.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~

                                                                                                                                                ;.~,. "'CI · ~\

                                                                                                                          4.J~u

253. When there is a group of three, two of you should not converse in
private, [thus] excluding the third, until you meet with others, as it may
offend him (Bukhari, Muslim).

Imam Nawawi says, "The same is the ruling if three or more converse to the exclusion
of another, except with his consent-or unless there are others present so as not to
create the feeling of exclusion. The prohibition applies both to the resident and the
traveller" (Mirqiit al-mafiiti/:1 8:699). [A] The above ruling also includes two or more
people conversing in a language not understood by the one left out. However, if the
latter consents to it, tacitly or otherwise, then it is not blameworthy for the other group
members to carry on a conversation between themselves.

254. When you prepare some broth (soup), add more water and be
thoughtful of your neighbors (Muslim).

[A] This J:!adith indicates how the Prophet ofAllah~ encouraged the believers to fulfill
the rights of their neighbors by adding water to their broth or soup, thereby increas-
ing the amount of food they prepare and sharing it with their neighbors. It is also an
example of the righteousness that made Muslim society-and still can-a healthy and
pleasant one to live in.

255. When you perform ablution, saturate your fingers and toes (Tirmidhf,

Ibn Miija).
[A] Khiliil, "saturate;' here means passing the fingers ofboth hands through each other,
llO ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

as well as the small finger of the left hand between the toes, during ablution. This is
encouraged to ensure that the hands and feet are thoroughly washed.

                                   ,::.:; t; ~~ ~ ~ 1~! (rol)

256. When you feel no shame, then do as you please (Bukharl).

[A] This J:!adith is not to be taken literally as if granting permission for one to do as
he pleases. It is instead a warning that losing one's modesty will lead one to obey the
base desires, which in turn will lead one to commit sinful and immoral acts. See also
J:!adith 6 above.

257. When one ofyou eats he should eat with his right hand, and when
one of you drinks he should drink with his right hand (Muslim).

It is obligatory (wiijib) to eat with the right hand because the Messenger of Allah~
strongly prohibited eating with the left hand (MirqiU al-mafat!~ 8?) and said that Satan
eats and drinks with his left hand (Muslim).

                                    f:?~%'J~~~f

258. When one of you puts on his footwear, he should begin with the
right, and when removing them, he should first remove the left. Let
the right one be the first to be worn and last to be removed (Bukhiirl,

Muslim).
The command in this J:!adith is not one of obligation but of recommendation (isti~bab)
(Mirqiit al-mafiitl~ 8:201). It is preferred to start with the right in all actions related to
purity, elegance, and nobleness-for instance, when wearing footwear or clothing, clip-
ping or combing the hair, applying antimony (kohl, surma), brushing the teeth, exiting
the lavatory, bathing, performing ww;lu' or dry ablution (tayammum), entering the
masjid, handing out charity, or when receiving something from others. Conversely, it
is recommended to begin from the left in all actions opposed to purity, elegance, and
                                                              COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS t:;::::==y 111

 nobleness, such as when removing footwear or clothing [i.e., by removing left leg ofpant
first), exiting the masjid, entering the lavatory, handling anything impure or unclean,
and using the left hand to wash one's private parts (istinja') and to blow or rinse the
 nose (Mazad al-raghibin, from Nawawi's commentary on $a/:li/:l Muslim).

         ~ 0t j;i ~)~~~I rs~t ~;I~! (1o(\)

259. When one of you enters the masjid he should perform two rakcas
of prayer prior to sitting down (Bukhari, Muslim).

It is highly recommended (musta/:labb), though not obligatory, to perform this prayer.
It should be performed upon entry into the masjid before sitting down, unless it is
 during the undesirable times of prayer, in which case, it is reported from some of the
 predecessors, one should make some dhikr (remembrance) of Allah instead. To obtain
 the reward of having performed these two rak'as, it would also suffice that a person
 performs a sunna prayer or the present obligatory [or qac;ia' (make-up)] prayer upon
 entry into the masjid (Mirqat al-mafati/:1 2:410).

260. When one of you has been away from home for a long time, he
should not return during the night to his wife (Bukharf, Muslim).

This only applies when returning unexpectedly, because the wife may not have made
 the necessary preparations for his return. If she is informed in advance, then she can
 make herself presentable by cleaning and combing her hair, removing any unwanted
hair, etc. (Mirqat al-mafatf/:1 7:456).

261. When you go to visit the ill, express belief that he will live long,
because [although] this will not avert anything, it will comfort him

(Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).
"Express beliefthat he will live long" by saying "no problem, you will be better" or "may
112 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Allah increase your life, cure you, and grant you well-being:' "This will not avert any-
thing" refers to destiny (qadr). Someone said to the caliph Hariin al-Rashid, when he
was ill, "Be easy with yourself and cheer up, for being healthy does not preclude death,
and illness does not preclude long life:' Hariin a!- Rashid exclaimed, "By Allah, you have
cheered me up and revived my spirit" (Mirqat al-mafati~ 4:46).
                     PART 2

Some Unseen Events Which the Messenger
    ~ Prophesied and Which Occurred
               After His Demise
114 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

1. The leader of the truthful, the Prophet !j. said, "There will constantly
be a group from my Umma holding fast to the matter of Allah. They
will not be harmed by those who abandon them, nor by those who op-
pose them. This will remain their condition until the decree of Allah
arrives" (Bukhari, Muslim).

The "matter of Allah" refers to matters of religion, including preservation of His Book,
knowledge of the Sunna, deriving juridical rulings from them [for the issues that arise],
fighting in His path [to protect the faith], acting in sincerity toward His creation, and,
in general, preserving His every command. "Decree of Allah" implies their death and
departure from this world or, according to some commentators the Last Day (Mirqat
al-mafiitib 10:653). Regarding the actual identity of the "group;' there are a number of
opinions. Imam A}:lmad ibn I:Ianbal states, "If these are not scholars of }:ladith then I
do not know who they are:' However, the more inclusive opinion is that the }:ladith
does not refer to any one group in particular, but, as Imam Nawawl states, a host of
individuals from every religious activity and group-scholars of]:ladith, commentators
of the Qur'an, teachers of sacred knowledge, fighters in the path of Allah, worshippers,
ascetics, etc. He states that all these individuals could exist throughout the world or a
few from them in some parts of the world. It is also possible that only some remain in
one part ofthe world until a time comes when none will remain, and it is then that "the
decree of Allah" [i.e., the Last Day] will come (Fafb al-Biiri 3:3271). [A] Such groups of
people will always remain in this world in order to preserve the various teachings and
practices of Islam until it is the will of Allah. "But Allah will complete His light, even
though the unbelievers may detest (it)" (Qur'an 61:8).

,. / ,. 0  .....
~_;:f'1)

2. The Prophet ~ said, "At the end of time, there will be flagrant
deluding liars who will convey to you narrations which neither you nor
                                                                                        PROPHECIES ~ 115

your forefathers will have heard. Beware ofthem, lest they misguide you
or involve you in mischief" (Muslim).

The term dajjal in the literal sense [as intended in the J:tadith] refers to a liar-one who
 conceals the truth with falsehood. It is also the Arabic name for the Antichrist (AI-Masi}:t
 al-Dajjal). This J:tadith refers to people who will bring forth fabricated narrations and
 rulings unheard of from the predecessors. They will engage in discussions on ambigu-
 ous aspects (mutashiibihat) of faith, whose knowledge Allah has kept to Himself (see
 Qur'an 3:7), and they will engage people in conversations regarding the [essence and]
 attributes of Allah and other deeper issues of Islamic theology avoided by the pious
 predecessors (Mirqat al-mafattb 1:390).

3. The Prophet~ said, "The best of the people are my generation, then
those who will succeed them, and then those who will succeed them.
After them, a people will come who will give testimony before swear-
ing an oath and will swear an oath before giving testimony" (Bukhiir!,

Muslim).
The three generations mentioned in the above J:tadith refer to the Companions (§ababa),
Followers (tabi'ln), and the Followers of the Followers (atbii' al-tabi'!n), respectively.
"After them, a people will come'' refers to people of subsequent generations who will have
 little regard for the laws of Allah and who will readily deliver false testimonies or swear
 false oaths. Or they will be quick to swear oaths and give testimonies without even being
 summoned (Mirqat al-mafatib 7:335). [A] Such matters were taken very seriously by the
 people of the first three generations. They would, for example, abstain from swearing
 an oath unless absolutely necessary since oaths are taken on Allah.

4. The Prophet~ said, "Verily a time will come upon the people when
only those consuming interest will remain. Those not [directly] involved
116 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

in consuming interest will surely experience its vapor" (Abu Dawud, Ibn

Maja).

This Q.adith speaks of the widespread prevalence of usury in later communities. So
much so that the Messenger ~ said even those not dealing in it will "experience its
vapor"-they will either witness its transaction [among friends or family], or will re-
cord it [in a vocation as a notary or accountant], or will eat from the food of one who
consumes it, or accept gifts from such people. In other words, even if someone is not
directly involved in any usurious activity, a time will come when he will be unable to
protect himself from its effects (Mirqat al-mafatl~ 6:6o).

                         0 / ~  ~~\jj/  :~~,J.O
 ;J.j ,...-

:_;.:,.
~  ~~  ~  ~8/1  ~i0t/ ;

s. The Prophet~ said, "Verily the religion (Islam) began in an estranged

state and it will return to the state in which it began. So glad tidings for
the estranged. They are those who will reform the corruption caused
in my Sunna by people after me" (Tirmidhi).

[A] Islam starting "in an estranged state" means that it was initially seen as something
peculiar and foreign to the people. The "estranged" are so because of their unawareness
and indifference to the affairs ofthe world and for being alienated by others (due to their
holding on to their religion at a time when others will not). This will take place toward
the end of time when there will remain only a small number of the faithful. They will
be treated as strangers, just as Muslims were during Islam's early days, for instance, the
way in which the Messenger of Allah ~ and his Companions were treated in Makka.

6. The Prophet &iJl. said, "This sacred knowledge will be borne by the
reliable authorities of each successive generation, who will [preserve it
and] remove from it the alterations of those guilty of exaggeration, the
                                                                                    PROPHECIES 1:::"'9 117

plagiarism of the corrupt, and the false interpretations of the ignorant"

(Bayhaql, Khatib al-Baghdadl, Sharaf a~bab al-badlth).

[A] This Q.adlth makes clear that the religion of Allah will be preserved until the Last
Day, because Allah will designate scholars from every generation to purify the sacred
sciences from reprehensible innovations and deviant interpretations ofthe Qur'an and
Sunna introduced by people from a previous generation.

1 0_,  o,..... ......                   o,.....      r;;           .;;;             ,.., ,  .;;;    / ,... ...
J_;- t;;JJI ~l; 'j ~~ ~ ~:UIJ :~J ~ 41 ~~I JL;J ( V)

/ ,.... _.. / ,...- J.       J. J.O 0 /
. u.:-:- u::-- r-::: r-::: u: lS! . \ 01 ;·t u- ~: l'~j, (, H/,...       .} ,...,o          .,;                  ,.-   _..-             0
                             J'~ :~;~~
                        ;oo             'j;      (,     1::; ;oo         l:liJI             j,;'j .. ,;                 1;::_  ':?         ·
                                                                                                    y, '.,)"'
                                          J                                                                            c..r

                                                                                                    ;                          ;

                                                          J. ;.o o
                                        JOI J J~IJ ~WI ~,&_AJI JL9 ~~~ 0~ ....-;. ,....o
                                                                                                  o ,...- ,....       ,..... 1 ;. ;.

                                        ;            ;

7· The Prophet lio said, "By Him in whose hand lies my life, the world

will not terminate until a time comes upon people when neither the

murderer will know why he killed, nor the murdered know why he

was killed:' The Prophet was asked, "How will this occur?" He replied,

"There will be turmoil. The murderer and the murdered will [both] go

to Hellfire" (Muslim).

"Both go to Hellfire"-the murderer for having killed and the murdered for his mur-
 derous intention. It will be a time of widespread trials and tribulations, and confusion,
 corruption, and turmoil will have entered all facets of life. The family of the murdered
 will be unaware ofthe motive behind his death (Mirqat al-mafatzb 9:267). [A] A glimpse
 of this can be seen in many cities in the world, where people are unnecessarily killed in
 party-, tribe-, or gang-related violence.

                             ,. ,o ,.. ......                   o        , ,.....           o _, o               e _,          ,.....o
                             J4.11 :JL9 ~&_AJI t;J :l_jjl9 ~,&_AJI ~J 2-ll ~J

8. The Prophet~ said, "Time will become short, sacred knowledge will
be withdrawn, temptations will emerge, extreme avarice will descend,
and harj will prevail:' They asked, "What is the meaning of harj?" He
replied, "Massive discord and bloodshed" (Bukharz, Muslim).
ll8 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Time becoming "short" could allude to the Last Hour drawing close or time becoming
deficient in blessings due to the spread of vice (Mirqat al-mafiit!b 9:266). In another
narration, the Messenger~ explained this by saying, "A year will pass by like a month,
a month like a week, a week like a day, a day like an hour, and an hour like the burning
of a piece of firewood" (Tirmidh!). See also ]:ladith 23 below.

9. The Prophet ~ said, "By Him in whose hand lies my life, the world
will not terminate until a person passes by a grave and tosses and turns
on it [restlessly], saying, "I wish I were in place of the occupant of this
grave:' This [action] will not amount to some sort of personal habit. It
will be [the result of] tribulation" (Bukhar!, Muslim).

                   ~;~. ~                    y.o                    \       ,.              ,.;;               ,.. o
~3,..,.Zr A'l:J '11 ~\?_,
         -;,9 ;~~          -~)  -.;;                                            ~\

                                'll.Ji_:,AJI                                                      iJL:.)fl
,..,.                                 ,....                                                       ...........
         /         /                              /                                                            /

r~:~:J  ~, I0 &_0/~~~~               ,..,.  ~:i/             0/        t/   ~j~ J. ,..,..,  -~~\ I0

                           ·:I;JI                 U!                   _r,
; J ~                                                            ;

10. The Prophet ~ said, "Soon a time will come upon people when
nothing of Islam will remain but its name and nothing of the Qur'an
will remain but its script. Their masjids will be in fine condition and full
but will be empty of guidance. Their scholars will be the worst people
beneath the sky: from them corruption will emerge and in them it will
return'' (Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-!miin).

That "nothing of Islam will remain'' refers to the salient and integral aspects of Islam,
such as prayer, zakiit, and bajj, and that "nothing of the Qur'an will remain'' refers to
how it will not be recited as a form of worship or as a means of seeking knowledge
and inspiration, but simply as a form of customary reading or with an exaggerated
                                                                                       PROPHECIES ~ 119

beautification of the recitation and script [for entertainment and trade]. "Their masjids
will be in fine condition ..." meaning the masjids will have lofty structures, engraved
brickwork, exquisite chandeliers, and laid rugs. But they will be spiritually deprived in
lieu of their hosting ignorant imams and muadhdhins, who will be employed through
unlawful wealth, and thus devoid of any true scholarship and guidance with which to
lead the congregation.

   In this Q.adith, two evils are prophesied: the absence of qualified leadership and the
presence of corrupt guides who, instead of guiding people aright, will lead them astray
through their corrupt ideas and innovations. It has been stated, "The corruption of a
scholar is the corruption of the world:' The reason for this is that when the scholars
become corrupt, they no longer enjoin good or forbid evil [and cease to publicly pro-
claim truth and denounce falsehood]. As a result, the masses and society as a whole
become corrupt (Mirqat al-mafattl:z 1:532). [A] "And in them it will return'' could very
relevantly mean that the repercussions of the corruption they spread will come back
upon them. For instance, some scholars prohibit the general public from following
qualified scholarship and instead encourage direct recourse to the Qur'an and Sunna.
This eventually results in the scholars themselves being taken lightly and not trusted
by their congregations.

  Masjids will be used for social purposes (including backbiting and futile talk) rather
than the performance of prayer, Qur'an recitation, and the spreading of sound Islamic
knowledge. Many scholars state the prophecy ofthis Q.adith is evident today, especially
in a number of countries in the West, where there is a scarcity of qualified imams and
scholars to guide the communities. Committees or personnel in charge ofmanaging the
financial and public affairs ofthe masjid do not place sufficient emphasis and importance
when seeking qualified bearers of prophetic knowledge and in their place call on local
academics and professionals of secular fields to teach the masses their religion. This is
sadly the case in many parts of North America and other cities around the world. See
also Q.adith 23 below.

n. The Prophet ~ said, '~t the end of time there will be [groups of]
people who will pose [to one another] their brotherhood in public but
 120 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

will be enemies in secret:' It was asked, "0 Messenger ofAllah! How will
 that be?" He replied, "It will be because of [the self-interests] of some
 concerning others and the fear of some from others" (AI:zmad).

 This means that love or hatred between certain groups of people will be based on un-
 derlying motives and not for the sake of Allah. When somebody's service or assistance
 is required, they will express outward friendship and love for them, but their hearts will
 be devoid of the warmth of true affection and sincerity, and they will act with enmity
 toward others (Mirqat al-mafiUI/:1 9:191). See also J:tadith 215 above.

12. The Prophet ~ said, "The pious will leave [this world] one after
 another and only the chaff will remain like the chaff of barley or dates.
Allah will not have the slightest concern for them'' (Bukharf).

Allah will not look upon such people with mercy, because they abandoned the per-
 formance of good deeds and the striving for good conduct. Hence, they will become
 worthless in the sight of Allah (Mazad al-raghibfn 75), and they will be deprived of
 divine guidance and the outpouring of His noble assistance. Allah says, "And He will
 befriend the righteous" (Qur'an 7:196).

13. The Prophet ~ said, "The Final Hour will not transpire until the
most successful person [in regard to the affairs] of the world will be a
baseborn person, son of a baseborn" (Tirmidhf).

"Successful" here refers to one who is endowed with wealth, prosperity, high worldly
 position, or authority. The J:tadith relates to illegitimate, bad-mannered people from
 lowly background and unknown ancestry who will amass huge amounts ofwealth and be
 considered as fortunate people because oftheir worldly possessions and position (Mirqat
 al-mafatf/:1 9:227). [A] This type of scenario is prevalent and easily observable today.
                                                                                        PROPHECIES ~ 121

                        ~,...       - . r ""'       ~o~!t;~  ::"l.z.;; ':.~  ~~ ~,...,  .J.   -;I:; ~-  ~ t ,~_~~  J,.,L..,.;... ~
                                                              r-J                            IJ"Ą-'                    J
l.;J\,0L;· v; 8\ 41 (U) -.rl1;::_r' ~-,.>~~ ,....-J_....

                                             1;::_

                                                                                             ;.:;.j1 ~ ~wl5 ~:

14. The Prophet ~ said, "A time will come upon the people when a
person among them practicing his Religion with perseverance will be
like one clutching onto a cinder" (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi).

These types ofcircumstances will come about because ofwidespread transgression and
disobedience of Allah, the general dwindling of faith from people's hearts, and their
complete focus on accumulating the pleasures of this world. [A person's own family
members will oppose him if he is steadfast in practicing Islam.] It is a time when one
will have to exercise great patience and perseverance, just as if one had to walk with a
burning piece of coal (Mirqat al-mafati~ 9:231). [A] As is observed today, anyone wish-
ing to follow the commandments of his Creator, illuminate his heart with piety, imbue
himself with Islamic character, and have his appearance conform with the Sunna is
confronted by difficulty and at times even abuse (e.g., a man attempting to grow a longer
beard or a woman attempting to dress modestly and cover herself). Such a person will
be considered backwards despite having exemplary character traits and a hospitable
disposition. Many glad tidings have been mentioned for such people.

                                J.           J. ,....        ""'                             ,....;. / ,....J. ;. ,... ,...-                  ,....
-~ ~~~ rsJ~ ~.;~ ~ 41 ~);JJ -~~ ~L:;S :~ ~J -~ ;. ,....
           " y. .... ;.

0 _j.  ;.  ,..., ,....   0          ,....                    ,9- ,.... ,... _.,,.,..         0          ;.     ;., 0     ,..._ ,.... 0 .....
~.JJ1.:;_;_ :JL9 ~~J.ll L; ;tl JY:) ~ :~L9 JW .z_;.J.ll ~jl9 ~ J~J

                                                                                                            ~         ~

                                                                                                                      '~            ~
                                                                                                            ~_r.JI ~IJS'J

15. The Prophet ~ said, "Soon nations will summon each other to att
tack you just as a group of diners usher each other toward their meal:'
Somebody asked, "Because we will be few in number at the time?'' The
Messenger~ replied, "No, you will be numerous, but you will be foam
[and rubbish]like that carried by a torrent. And Allah will extract from
122 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

the hearts of your enemies [their] awe of you and place weakness into
your hearts:' The person asked, "What will this weakness be?" He re-
plied, "Love of the world and dislike of death" (Abu Dawud, Bayhaqi, Shu'ab

al-iman).

In the ]:J.adith, foam is likened to internal cowardice, a humiliated status, and the
Muslims being divided and weak (Mirqat al-mafatib 9:232). [A] "Love of the world
and the dislike of death'' stems from a deep attachment to this world by people oflater
generations, as opposed to the condition of the Companions, the pious predecessors,
and many generations of Muslims thereafter.

16. The Prophet~ said, "The Final Hour will not transpire until people
will emerge who will eat using their tongues as cows do" (Abmad).

Just as cows do not differentiate between dry and wet grass or sweet and bitter plants
while eating, people will also be unconcerned about what they say while earning their
living [for instance, the salesman who mixes lies with some truth to make a sale].
Furthermore, a cow primarily uses its tongue to feed itself, whereas other animals use
their teeth to separate food and break it down before swallowing. In a similar manner,
these people will use their tongues [by delivering eloquent proposals and speeches] as
a medium ofgaining their livelihood and acquiring possessions, without differentiating
between what is lawful and unlawful (Mirqat al-mafatib 8:551). See the next ]:J.adith.

0        :;~  /                         0      / .J.  :;  /. / /
.1>-i ;-# J..P ,,...,...../,...            :;
t; ~~~ ~~'10t;j '--'""01 ~ ~4 :~j 41 ~~ JL;j (w)
   ,...
                 .....           ,....                    ,.....

                                               i1jJ1:} if ~iJ1 ~l ·~

17· The Prophet ~ said, "A time will come upon the people in which it
will not concern a person whether what he acquires is from a lawful or
an unlawful source" (Bukhari).
                                                                                       PROPHECIES /:::::'==i 123

18. The Prophet ~ said, "One of the signs of the Final Hour is that
people in the mosque will prompt each other but they will not find any
imam to lead them in prayer" (Abu Dawud, Abmad).

This will be owing to their ignorance of the legal rulings concerning imama, or lead-
ing the congregational prayer. As a result, no one person will feel qualified to lead. It
is blameworthy for a person to abstain from leading the congregational prayer [when
prompted] if no other more qualified person is available [as this causes unnecessary
delay and confusion] (Mirqat al-mafatib poo).

19. The Prophet ~ said, "From my Umma, the ones that love me most
will be those who will come after me-each one ofthem will be prepared
to sacrifice his family and possessions to see me" (Muslim).

There will be a group from among each generation that love the Messenger~ in a way
outlined in the ]:ladith (Mirqat al-mafatib 10:653).

.;;; ...- J.o                   o ;. J.       .;;;        .::1         ,..... J. .;;;  ,.... ,..., ,....

                                                                          .&1            JL;j (r·)
~ ~ r.Ji ~'JI ~~ ~ ~ 0~ ~! :~j ~ J.P ~I ,.... o

         o,....,...,_..,J.,...         /O           _...               o_..,           0  ,..:',..,.

~~ ~~ 0.J.L;~.J ~~:;. 0~.J w.J~4 0.J~4 -~.Ji _;..r
..... /        /                .....      /                    .....  /                  ,...,..... /

20. The Prophet ~ said, ''Among the latter people of this Umma there

will be a group that will have reward similar to that of the first people.

They will enjoin good, forbid evil, and fight against those who cause

strife" (Bayhaqi, Dala'il al-nubuwwa).
124 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                                        ;.;.j.lJij ~~.lJi

21. The Prophet~ said, "A time will surely come upon the people when
only dinars and dirhams will be of benefit" (Al.zmad).

'Allama Tibi explains this [:J.adith: "[A time will come when] only earnings will benefit
[and preserve] a person, because without it he may fall into the unlawful:' Some scholars
said, "Do trade and make a living, for you are in a time when, if one of you falls into
some need, the first thing you will consume is your religion" (MirqiU al-mafiUi}_z 6:33).
In former times, pious people encouraged the absence of wealth (faqr) and deemed
it an asset, but nowadays lack of wealth is considered a shortcoming. [As the [:J.adith
states,] everything will come to revolve around the possession of wealth. Those who
possess it will be able to advance in all fields, including, in many cases, "religion'' (for
instance, constructing masjids, madrasas, religious institutions, schools, publishing
houses, and employing imams and teachers). Therefore, some of the predecessors
preferred that scholars be wealthy in order to avoid being mistreated by the wealthy.
Sufyan al-Thawri said, "Wealth was once frowned upon [by the religious scholars] but
now it has become a form of protection and defense for the Muslim. If it were not for
this wealth, then these rulers [the Abbasids] would treat me like a towel and clean with
it what they please" (Maziid al-riighibin 78).

~ rJi :a)~~81 ff ~ ~~~: ~ :rl.:) ~ :t1 ~ ~~ Jlij (n)

·.;~l! .;*).;~}~ .;t;...L5~L:.;) .~81 ~ 5Y.~).;li ~Sits ~t;...
   ,..,  ,.....  ,.....                                         .....
/                        /        /             //

                                     ,., .....  ..... /  /  y.  , .....
                                     il5) ll5 ~~ ~ ~.P

22. The Prophet ~ said, "There are two types of people who will enter
the Hellfire, whom I have not yet seen: people who will have whips
similar to ox-tails with which they will beat people, and women who
will be dressed, yet nude. They will seduce men and will themselves be
inclined toward them. Their heads will be like the swaying humps of
Bactrian camels. They will neither enter Paradise nor smell its fragrance,
                                                                                       PROPHECIES ~ 125

even though its fragrance can be smelled from such-and-such a distance"

(Muslim).

Those in possession ofsuch "whips" will beat people without right; they will torment and
oppress them. The latter part refers to women who dress in clothing through which their
physical forms are visible; or that they are clad in skimpy clothing and thus, semi-nude.
It can also refer to those adorned with outer finery, [makeup,] and jewelry, but who are
devoid of the clothing of taqwa, which is the fear of Allah and modesty. They will lure
men through their appearance and gait and will themselves be inclined to immorality
and fulfillment of personal desires.

   The ]:ladith compares them to the swaying humps of Bactrian camels either because
they will tie pieces of cloth into their hair (which will resemble humps) or they will
arrange their hair to appear attractive and draw attention. Some scholars have also
explained this as walking with one's head up with a haughty demeanor, rather than
lowering one's head in modesty. Mulla 'Ali al-Qari states that this type of hair style was
found among women in Egypt during his time. The "distance" to which the fragrance
of Paradise can be smelled was explained by the Messenger of Allah ~ in an another
J:!adith as being "a distance of forty years" (Bukharl) (Mirqat al-mafati~ 7:83).

   [A] "They will neither enter Paradise" means they will not immediately enter Paradise
because ofthe sins they have committed, but will eventually enter because oftheir faith,
ifthey are Muslim. No doubt, this J:!adith cannot be more applicable than it is today. The
Messenger ofAllah i$!. explicitly states in this and in other similar ]:ladiths that particular
groups of people will not be found in his time (owing to the blessedness and purity of
that generation), but will be found among those who would come later. This J:!adith is
thus just one ofthe many proofs confirming the truthfulness of the Messenger ofAllah
~ and his prophecies.

.._L..:..)' })(.)'"' ....,.., 8Ui.l I """' I\ ·'" ::: d::.JI y.,.... .,..

     .~ ~
     L:J~ ·'~ ~ 1I.~ ~' I:~ l.l\ · ·" · ...._,.....-;:;:;o,....
                            1      ,....,....                                               o o ,J. 0                  I           o

     ~, -~                     /                  ~r::- ~r,.,)""<"'YJ                                                     ""'·""
                     ,....                                  .....                                       ,....  ,.....
     //                                           /                                         /

                            \_'.,\!....,._.. :"".'.i)'\~ '.\...! ,.... :,..... ~~_"l"o'c:.       ,....  p\O:o:",·...'. {~ j\J.'1·,~... ~\""1o1,...e:- -~:-

                                                                                            ~ ' ·

                                                     ? //                                      /               /

23. The Prophet ~ said, "Allah will not seize sacred knowledge by

extracting it from people, but will seize it by removing the scholars

until, when there remains no learned person, people will appoint igno-

rant men as leaders. When questioned, they will pass rulings without
126 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

knowledge. Thus, they will be misguided and will misguide others"

(Bukhiiri, Muslim).
Here, "leaders" refers to such positions as caliph, judge, mufti, imam, or scholar (Mirqiit
al-mafiiti~ q6o). See also the next i:J.adith.

l~i/  01~        /  ~)  ~  0t.:51     ~~      J_;-  ~I  ~~~:iJ  .;~}:-:.  ~~~
         ""         "" ,..... ,..""'
             '-J

      /                               ,....,        /           /             /

                                                                   /0.    ;.        o,....
                                                                   \ -;::'o-:' !_...~:
                                                                   ~u---::
                                                                                 /

24. The Prophet~ said, ''Acquire sacred knowledge and teach it tooth-

ers, learn the obligations ofReligion and teach them to others, and learn

the Qur'an and teach it to others; for I am a mortal being and sacred

knowledge will soon [too] be eradicated, and strife will occur to such

an extent that two people will disagree over a religious obligation and

will find nobody to decide between them" (Darimi, Mustadrak).

The word Jara'ilj, translated above as "obligations of religion;' could also refer to the
 knowledge of inheritance and the distribution of legacy (irth). The reason that they
"will find nobody to decide between them" will either be that ignorance will prevail or
 that corruption and strife will be widespread (Mirqiit al-mafiiti~ 1:534).

                                                                                                         oJl0~G oJ.J. oJ.

                                                                     ~~
25. The Prophet ~ said, "Recite the Qur'an with the modulation and
tones of the Arabs, but refrain from the modulation ofthose who recite
                                                                                       PROPHECIES ~ 127

love poetry and [the modulations] of the people of the two books [the
Jews and Christians]. Some people will come after me who will recite the
Qur'an in a singing and wailing manner, but it will not go beyond their
throats, and their hearts and the hearts ofthose who are charmed by their
performance will be caught by temptations" (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-lman).

It is required that one recite the Qur'an without the unnecessary stretching of certain
letters and words. It should be recited in a natural and simple way, like that of Arab
[reciters, i.e., those who observe the rules of tajwld], and without emulating the tones
of non- Muslims, for instance, Christian hymns [or Hindi songs]. The phrase "it will
not go beyond their throats" either means that their recitation will not be accepted by
Allah, or that the recitation will not strike a chord within the reciter himself, preventing
him from attaining true guidance (MirqiU al-mafati~ 4:706). "And their hearts and the
hearts ofthose ... will be caught by temptation" due to their insincerity and ostentation
and their seeking praise for their recitation, while their listeners will merely enjoy the
sound and rhythm and will not take admonishment from the guidance and wisdom of
the words (Mazad al-raghibln So).

                  With all due praise to Allah and by His divine guidance
                    making it possible, the first chapter [part 2] ends here.

                            Following, is the second chapter [part 3].
      .:'Jn'll ~~~~
     PART 3

Stories & Accounts
  (40 Narrations)
130 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                      J;..;.:~               ~? ~           -;;""'                             -;; ""'

                                                                            0ij                              '10i
if_·; ~J"         -~~                                                                  ;.       -;;     ~,1                           0     0.....        /                    0        / ....               /               0

                                                                                       .&1   '11                                            0i rJL:'jl :Jlj .,JL:'jl

                                                                                                .... ....                                                                /                                /           .....

                                        ,...,
,Jlj 01, ::."11 c;Ls<q ··. .~~I ~I ,... ,....?                   /                                                                                                    /                         0
                                                                                             0  ;d.~ / ,,...  0/ l..,...,.J a;~\" ~~ J ,-..., ~              ,...           /          ....        .,.J~     c;~l / ..... /
                                                                                                <.::"J                                                                                       Y
                                ·.      ,... · ·,...                        ,...,.,..  ·.                                                                                   .  .  r  U
                                   /                                                                                                                                                 ~,

.~.:0;_;,                               -~~~/ J                             ~~,o~               ~j;;.j                          0                                                 ~J _,,                        ,...
                                    //                              ~;;.                                                                       0    ~~J                                            ~~J /
                                                                                                              .r:-'11
                                :Jlj                                                                                               i J;llj

                                                                         ~                                    ~                    ~

~~                ~1)           ~;.     ~/                   0~     ~1)     ~t,.5..    41       ?~                  /  :Jl.i          .0t.,::.;. ~I:)-                               ~:).l/ i                   :Jl.i
                                                                                                                                                          ,... .....                    .,....,..
                                                                                                              Zli

/                                                            /                                                                           /

,... /                                                       ..... ,...                , J.          0        / ,...                                                                 .....,... ,..., ,... /
:Jlj -~L.:JI ~ ~4 ~ J~l ~ :Jlj -~L.:JI :_; ~:).t; :Jlj dl;.
                                                                                                                                                    ,...
                  /                                                 /                                                                                              /           /

                  .,....,.,     0 ,...         0 / ,...                  0  / 0.....                    /    , ; 0 / / 0/                   ,... /                                   /                    0     0 ~....
;~ J                                  ol~l                   c;~l           ~;               -~)             ~"J'I                                        .yl)~i                                          .J~L;
                  4.JL.;JI                                                             0ij                              .1t0i               :Jlj                                             ;_;           ,..., ,...
               /                                                                                                                                                     /
                                                                                                                               /

~J.:j ~ 4:jJLi ~ -~ ,: ;.!_; Jik;l ~ :Jli -~~~ .j 5~)~ :llll
                                                      .....
   /                                                                                         /                                                                              /

1. 'Umar ibn al-Khattab ~narrates, "One day, while we were in the
company of the Messenger of Allah~' a person with very white cloth-
ing and jet black hair appeared before us. He bore no visible signs of
travel and none of us recognized him. He sat down by the Prophet ~
resting his own knees against his and placing his palms on his thighs.
He said, '0 Mu]:lammad, tell me about Islam: The Messenger of Allah
~ replied, 'Islam is that you testify that there is no deity except Allah
and that Mu]:lammad is Allah's Messenger, that you establish ~aliit, pay
zakiit, fast during Rama<;lan, and make the pilgrimage to the House
                                                                      STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 131

[of Allah] if you have the capacity to go: He said, 'You have spoken the

truth: We were surprised at his questioning him and then confirming
his statement. Then he asked, 'Now tell me about faith: The Messenger
of Allah ~ replied, 'Faith means that you believe in Allah, His angels,
His books, His messengers, and the Last Day, and that you believe in
destiny, both good and bad: He again said, 'You have spoken the truth;
and then asked, 'Now tell me about Perfection: The Messenger ofAllah
~ replied, 'It means that you should worship Allah as though you see
Him, and if you do not see Him He sees you: He asked, 'Now tell me
about the Final Hour: The Messenger ~ replied, 'The one who has
been questioned knows no more than the one who has questioned: He
said, 'Then tell me about its signs: The Messenger 5I replied, '[One of
its signs is] that a slave-girl will beget her mistress, and that you will
see barefoot, naked, destitute shepherds competing with one another
in [the grand construction of] buildings:" 'Umar ~ narrates, "The
person then departed and after some time the Messenger ~ asked me,
'0 'Umar! Do you know who the questioner was?' I replied, 'Allah and
His Messenger know best: He said, 'It was Jibril; he came to teach you
your religion"' (Muslim, Bukharl).

Scholars have explained that such a sudden and unexpected appearance by the Angel
Jibril ~~ was to draw the attention of the Companions toward the conversation due to
take place between himselfand the Messenger ofAllah$. This way they would remem-
ber it more clearly. That no one but the Messenger of Allah ~ recognized the visitor
increased their curiosity and interest in him. He sat close to Allah's Messenger f!l\ as an
expression of humbleness and eagerness to receive the answers to his questions.

   After an answer, the visitor would declare that it was correct. This left the Companions
even more astonished, because a questioner would normally be expected to be unaware
of the answer, and not act as though a teacher was confirming a student's responses.
However, scholars explain that this was also to draw the attention of the congregation
toward the answers.

   The terms islam and lman are normally used interchangeably for faith, but in this
l).adith, they are used more in their linguistic sense. Islam means submission (especially
of the outward), and hence the answer to the question "What is Islam'' was given in
the form ofthe five pillars of Islam.lman, on the other hand, refers to internal belief or
conviction of the heart, and hence the answer to "What is faith (Iman)" was given by
 132 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

 explaining those tenets offaith that are formed on belieffrom the heart. This difference is
also considered in the following verse: "The desert Arabs say, 'We believe (amanna): Say,
'You have no faith, but (rather) say, "We have submitted our wills to Allah (aslamna);"
for faith (iman) has not yet entered your hearts" (Qur'an 49:14).

   'Allama Qurtubi explains that the reason Jibril questioned the Messenger~ regard-
 ing the Last Day and the Messenger i(\\\ answered that he knew no more about it than
 anyone else was to discourage anyone from asking the same question [in the future,
 because it is from among the five things which no one but Allah has any knowledge
 of (see Qur'an 31:34) ].

    However, the Messenger ~ highlighted some of the signs of the Last Day. He ~ said,
"A slave-girl will beget her mistress:' One of the explanations offered for this statement
 is that it prophesies the disobedience and disrespect of parents that would prevail in
 later times [as is observed today]. A second explanation is that due to numerous wars,
 many slaves will be taken and children will be begotten from them. The children being
 free would end up becoming masters of their mothers. A third explanation is that this
 is a metaphor indicating the complete turnaround of worldly norms. For instance, the
 baseborn would be raised to places of leadership and honor and respectable people
would be lowered to humiliation (Mirqat al-mafattb 108-131, Mazad al-raghibin 83).
 [A] This narration holds great importance because it summarizes some of the most
 salient and important aspects of the religion-islam, iman, ibsan, and the Last Day. It
 is referred to as the Gabriel J):adith [I:Iadith Jibril]. I:Iadith scholars have paid special
 attention to it and have written extensive commentaries on it.

2. 'Abdullah ibn 'Amr ~ narrates, "Once, when returning with the Mes-
senger ofAllah~ from Makka to Madina, we came upon a place ofwater,
and as it was time for the 'A~r prayer, a group of people hurried ahead
and hastily performed ablution. When we reached them we found that
their heels were dry, water not having touched them. The Messenger of
                                                                      STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 133

Allah ~ said, 'Destruction be for these heels by the Hellfire! Perform
ablution thoroughly"' (Muslim).

The idea ofdestruction refers either to the heels specifically or, more likely, to the person
himself. The Messenger of Allah ~ then instructed them to complete their ablution
thoroughly by observing all the sunnas and etiquette [which ensure the fulfillment of
the obligation], because it is necessary to have water reach every part ofthe foot [up to
and including the ankles] (Mirqat al-mafati/:t 2:109).

:81 ~j r_;. r-1 ~._-, ~41 J.;, ~10t~ J~41 ~~ ~~ ~):.;J (i)

                                                                                           ~                                     ~      ~

                                                                                                                                        _9.,...      ,
JL; --.:...t~ J)J.ll ~~ ~ :JL; 40~ !.r ~ .b:-l9 --.:...t~ J)J.llj / ...../\ ,....
          ;. ,...       ;.     0                                        ,.... ,.... ,....       /             0      ;. /,... ""',.,                       0

                                                    /                                      ~           /,...               /

~}.b'l~1                j..    ;{! ~~                           j:.;j101         :J~          ·.&I     JY:)          ~ ~:~3      :~~    -~~       ~  ~  :Jw
     ,....                                            /                    ,...                 .....

3. Abu Dharr ~ narrates, "The Prophet !il'l\ went out. It was autumn
and the trees were shedding their leaves. He took hold of two branches
of a tree and the leaves began to fall off. He said, 'Abu Dharr: I said, 'At
your service, 0 Messenger ofAllah: He said, 'When a Muslim performs
prayer for the pleasure of Allah, his sins are shed from him just as these
leaves are shed from this tree"' (A/:tmad).

When a Muslim performs prayer for the pleasure ofAllah-not for ostentation or worldly
gain-his sins are shed off in the way described (Mirqat al-mafati/:t 2:279).

                                              , ,.. ,. , ,.. /, \ ,, / / ... ,..                                                                           Ł)
   ..:s- :;
~.&1 J.P)e ~r..::.                                                 :JL;          ~Jw .&1               ..~J~ J.~):.;_-;          .....                  ,t

   ,....             /                           /                                                            ,....  ~                  ,....

                        ,.... ; . ; ;                  0 ,..... 0                                                       ,                               / J.
~ .!.1::~1; ~L:I :~ ·~ :~ ,~(.;._'; ~J..PJ; ~l! ~J ~ /
          ,...,....                                                               ,.... ""'""'                                      , ,...;,. :;          41

                                                                                 JW

;)~I;;~~ ~; ~ ~ti :J~ -~~~ _-;.;. :~ ~ ~~~;; _-;t :J~ -~1
/                    /  .....          ,....                    ......                                                        /                         /

4· Rabl'a ibn Ka'b ~ narrates, "I spent a night with the Messenger of

Allah ~. I brought his water for ablution and other necessities. He said

to me, 'Ask something: I replied, 'I ask for your company in Paradise:
134 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

He said, 'Anything besides that?' I answered, 'That is it: In response he
said, 'Help me to accomplish this for you by prostrating in abundance"'

(Muslim).

The "other necessities" mentioned probably refer to his tooth stick (miswak), prayer mat,
etc. The Messenger of Allah~ asked Rabi'a ibn Ka'b whether it was really his compan-
ionship he desired, as a way of discerning his resolve. The Companion had asked for a
very lofty position-a position, according to Ibn a!- Malak, which is not reached through
prayer alone, but with the supplication of Allah's Messenger !l\1., and as the Messenger's
~final statement indicates, through opposing one's lower self. Therefore, the statement
can be more literally translated as "help me overcome your lower self by prostrating
in abundance:' It is the tradition of noble people to reward those who provide them a
service (Mirqat al-mafat!b 2:615).

       -;;;          _,                     \ ,....J /                           ,.... y.
j..P (o) ~.&1 ~Jw ~~~J.0~1~J ,...... !)//..... /

             .&1 JY:)0l5 :Jli               .&1  ....... ~ ..... ,....,......

.....        /                                                                             ,....

                         i  1            0              ,;;,.... ,....  1  / J.                   ,.... -;;;
J_;.. J_;.. .~ 1:-j~ ~ t_l~l ~ ~~~ts- 8~ ~;;~l ~J 0,..../ ;;;'

                lii LSi)

5. Nu'man ibn Bashir ~ narrates, "The Messenger of Allah ~ was
so meticulous in straightening our rows for prayer that it appeared
as though he was straightening the shaft of an arrow with them. This
remained his practice until he felt that we had perfected it from him.
Then one day he entered the masjid, stood to lead the prayer, and was
about to say the takb'ir (Alliihu akbar! ''Allah is Great"), when he saw
somebody with his chest protruding from the row. He said, 'Servants
of Allah! Either straighten your rows or Allah will surely put your faces
in contrary directions"' (Muslim).

One person standing slightly forward than the others in a row may cause inconvenience
to them, and thus cause the hearts to come into conflict and cause people to ignore and
turn their faces away from one another. Ma~har states, "External conduct is indicative
of internal conduct. Hence, ifone does not follow the commands of Allah and His Mes-
senger outwardly, it will lead to a conflict in statements and create [internal] resentment,
                                                  STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 135

which will then manifest itself in the outward too. This will create enmity between you

so that you will start ignoring each othd'

The statement "Put your faces in contrary direction" has been explained as meaning

"your faces will be turned backwards" or "they will be transformed into the faces of

animals;' or it could also mean that the hearts will become hostile toward one another

and pave the road to more controversies and internal wrangling (Mirqat al-mafatt~

3=169, Mazad al-n1ghibln Bs).

*41 j_.;, ~If~ l!J :Jli ~ j~41 ~~ \JL;. J. ~I~ z;_J (i)
                                                     " /                    /

Z,l5j ·~IJs ~Y. ~ ~J 0f ~~ ~J ,: ::5 ~ ,,: ~~ ~.4}1 ~~J
,:,;  ,.... ,....                                                                   ......     ,....

2 I~! :J                                                                                         ,....         J~i J. ......
f1_;.j/\0IIIJ~. :J          .;;;  0/              f~/11_,..JJ. i/  _;.01            ~/      ~           t;
                                                                                               :Jli
                    fWJ11         i:J

                                                     ~"'r:l I0I
                                            i . . /\t-; d81' Y\...::.. /, ;. 0/             ~ z:;          -;;;

                                                                 y1.-.:     ...1.J                      1'\ lL
                                                                                                      .Jr..)"::"' ·
                                            .::s  /                                 .....               ,....  ,....

6. 'Abdullah ibn Salam ~ narrates, "When the Messenger of Allah &J1,

arrived in Madi:na, I went to see him and upon observing his face, I

recognized that it was not the face of a liar. The first thing he said was,

'0 people! Spread salam, provide food, maintain the ties of kinship,

perform prayer at night when people are asleep, and you will enter

Paradise in peace"' (Tirmidhl).

Prior to the advent of Islam, 'Abdullah ibn Salam had been trained as a rabbi and hence
was knowledgeable ofthe Torah and the promised arrival ofthe Final Prophet. Therefore,
 upon setting his eyes on the Messenger ofAllah ill\, he immediately recognized him for
who he was and had no recourse other than to confess that this was not the face of an
 impostor, but rather, that of the Final Prophet ill\ (Mazad al-raghibln 86).

   The Messenger of Allah ill\ said "spread salam" among those you are acquainted
 with and among those you are not; "provide food" to the needy, orphans, and the like;
"maintain the ties of kinship" [even if they sever it]; and "perform prayer at night when
 people are asleep;' in order to avoid ostentation [and gain greater reward and proximity
 to Allah] (Mirqat al-mafatl~ 4:404). [A] Salam, unlike many other popular greetings, is
 a meaningful supplication. When one says Al-salamu 'alaykum to another, he is actu-
 ally saying, "May Allah grant you peace and safetY:' Therefore, it is very meaningful to
 spread this prayer as much as possible.
136 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                                    ""' ~,..
r-fi JL;; ~ ~~I ,c;~ ~~~ ~ ~) ~~ ~J ""' J.                                                            tf{ )
                   .,;;     ,.., ,... """"' ? _...            I ""'J. ""'  ""' ""'
                                                                                                      "V
.&1                            JW                                    .&1

                   4-~:s~ Q5 ~:J~ -~:s~~~~ :.:J~ ~~~~ :rL:,

7. 'A'isha ~ narrates that they sacrificed a goat. The Prophet !i. asked,

"How much is left of it?" She told him that only the shoulder remained.
He remarked, "The whole of it is left except the shoulder" (Tirmidhl).

The goat was slaughtered by some ofthe Companions or, more specifically, by members
of the Messenger's ~ household. They had distributed most of the meat and only the
shoulder remained. The Messenger's ~ statement was meant to convey that whatever
had been shared out had in turn become a source of reward for them in the Hereafter,
and the small portion that remained in their hands would simply be disposed of when
eaten. [Thus, the meat which was distributed carried an eternal and spiritual value that
far surpassed the value ofthe meat kept for the household.] Allah says, "What is with you
will vanish; what is with Allah will endure" (Qur'an 16:96) (Mazad al-raghibin 86).

~~1:, ;. ,..... o  ~-" ~~o  ~J.  ~F ,  ~WI.,..o     ;. o      ·~I~)  J1~  IAI~i:,,....""'  ~J0 J-' I  ~,...,  ~

                                                    i;;JI:,

                                                                           ~"'IJ~iJIJ~.;;IJ

8. It is related from Abii Qatada $ that a funeral procession passed by
the Messenger of Allah ~ and he remarked, "He is either relieved or
others are relieved from him:' They asked, "Messenger of Allah ~' what
do you mean by these words?" He replied, ''A believer is relieved of the
troubles and harms of the world by passing onto Allah's mercy, and of
the transgressing person, the servants of Allah, the land, the trees, and
the animals are relieved" (Bukharl, Muslim).

'Allama Tibi explains that rain and crops are sometimes prevented from the people
because of the ill influence of the transgressing person. Thus, when he dies, humans
                                                                     STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 137

and other creatures are relieved, for Allah again blesses the earth with plentiful rain
and crops (Mirqat al-majatfb 4:69).

              ~                             ~         j~                      :J~                           ~~;.
;;.J ( ~                                                      .....  ~;            ~           ~) .. ,....                          1\)

,....
   41              .&1    J.;:.)                                                      Jt.;;41

                   .....   /

   ,.... _.., .J. ,....            ,.....o        :1                 ,..- J.  ;;J     -'  ,....- ,....,.    I ,.,             -;;;
~l ,J~ ~~1J.;J1 :~j ~ .&1 ~~I J_;:.) ·l>j~::~~J ~J fiJ
   :Jli                                                                                   JW

                                                                                                                                    y.

                                                                                                                      J."' 0  ,.... ~
                                                                                                                      0~~1

9. Burayda ~narrates that Bilal ~went to visit the Messenger of Allah

® while he was having his afternoon meal. The Messenger of Allah ®

asked, "Food, Bilal?" He replied, "I am fasting, 0 Messenger of Allah:'
The Messenger ofAllah~ said, "We are eating our food and Bilal's food
is being reserved in Paradise. Are you aware, Bilal, that the bones of a
fasting person glorify Allah and the angels seek forgiveness for him
as long as food is being eaten in his presence?" (Ibn Maja, Bayhaqi, Shu'ab

al-lman).

                         ,.... J.                        ,.., J. ,_.; ""' ,..,        I ,....J ,....

                                                                  :Jli
J[;j ;_;J (' ·) ~;.) ~J ~ ~~I ~i ~ .&1-i'~ ..r.~ o;;J-.;J

                          .&1

?     ,.....                                          /                                               /     ,::./

~j ti ~ci ci :Jw .ci :~ j~ ~~~ ~ :Jw -~~~ ,: ~;~ -~) ~ 0L5

   ~                                                                                                               ~

10. Jabir ~ narrates, "I visited the Messenger of Allah ® regarding a

debt my father owed. When I knocked on the door he asked, 'Who is

it?' I replied, 'Me: He remarked, 'Me? Me?' as though he were displeased

by it" (Bukharl, Muslim).

The cause for displeasure expressed by the Messenger il\ll is apparent-a person should
disclose his name so that he can be easily identified. Another explanation is that the
admonishment was for not having said salam. It is not disliked for a person to say "me"
as a way of introduction if his voice is known and recognizable by the inhabitants of
138 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

the home, although some scholars have discouraged it based on this J:!adith (Mirqat
a/-mafatl~ 8:453).

;.      ....-                                  \           ,....            :Jli ~                      J.                         ,.....
                            J:,..:~~           ~                                           J~                    ~.. ~~ ~"'i
.&1     j.;, .&1            ,....      ,....               01_-,;i     5l5                              .&1                                 c;.J                  (")
                    .....
                                                           .....

        / /,...,  ;. ,....          ,.... - 0  ~           ,.... J.         .:;;        /               ~ ,..., ;. ,.... / /,....              -;:;                          ....-
K.!J .J~?'li.J r.J ~.&I~~~~~ ~~t 0K9 ·r.J ~
                  ~                                                                     ~            ~

                                       , ,.... ,. / -;;; ..... ,..... ,,.... .:I           / ,.             ;;;       ,..,_                 / ,. /                                  0

                                                                                        .&1 .. ~

                                                                                        .....
                                    Jj_:,; ·r.J ~ ~ :JW                                                 ~~I ~~i J~l
                                                                                                                    ,.....                                ,.....
                                    ,.... ,....

n. Anas ~ narrates that in the time of the Messenger of Allah il\J!, there

were two brothers. One ofthem would visit the Prophet~ and the other

would remain busy in his craft. The craftsman once complained to the

Prophet @. about his brother. The Prophet ~ remarked, "You may be

receiving your livelihood because of him'' (Tirmidhl).

The Messenger of Allah ~ cautioned the working brother that his earning a livelihood
was possibly due to the good fortune and blessings acquired by his brother from the time
he spent in the company of the Messenger~. This J:!adith also encourages giving one's
wealth to the poor, especially those who are occupied with the study ofsacred knowledge,
because that is a means of gaining blessing in one's earnings (Mazad al-raghibln 79).

j;.; :Jli .&1 J:,..:~ J1$~                                 ~        J~41           ~~        ~LkJ1               _;.        ilii.J          c;.J                  (rr)
                                                                                               ....-
,.....  ,.....              ......                                                 .. .....                        /             ,.....

        ,... ;.   ;;;               ,             ,. . .            ,... Vl ,....            0                      ;:;                     /        ,                  ;;;
~ .&1 ~~I J:,_.:~ ~ t_j;-? '-'-:\.9 ~I~ ~j r.J ~ .&1 ~

        /J        .;:;              / ,.... ,.....,..., ?           /  0           ;:;       ,.....              ,                       /     ,..,,.,.-          ::;1
~ .&1 ~~I JW ,;;~~~I~ 0!~1 J:,..:~ ~ :~,1 JW ·r.J

12. Wathila ibn al- Khattab "*" narrates that a person came to the Mes-

senger of Allah @. while he was sitting in the masjid. The Messenger ~
moved over [slightly]. The person said, "0 Messenger of Allah, there
is enough room:' The Messenger ~ said, "It is the right of a Muslim
that, upon seeing him, his brother should move over [as a gesture of
welcome]" (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-lman).
                                                      STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 139

13. 'Umar ibn Abi Salama ~ narrates, "I was a child in the care of the
Prophet &rt.. My hand would wander about the dish, so the Messenger
of Allah jj, instructed me, 'Take Allah's name, eat with your right hand,
and eat from your side"' (Bukhiiri, Muslim).

To eat from the section of the plate closest to the person applies when it contains a
single item of food. If there are a variety of items, then one may help himself from all
of them (Maziid al-riighibin 90).

     ...-_... J. }:..,... ...p.  _., ""' "" ,.. J.o   I ,..... J.  ,..                                     tf{ )
.;;.. ~ ~ JS'~ ~~ ~ Jw .&I~~~ J. ?i ~j ,u I                                       I O/     ,.... ,.

                                 0l5 :Jli

                                                                   ~/                   /

~ ,.. -~?,.IJ j~f..&. l '~.. ;., :J~ .~. "" J,l., ~~ \); .L.aJ ~l,. Q,..,....4w: 0-o,., ~ r~~
     ~I~~ ~ JS'~ ~ + ~~I ,....._.... ~,.....,....
                                 J. y.O J. / ,.; / /               / / ,.  -z.j'           / J.      -:;;  /

;tl  \).9                        0lk;.:JI Jlj t; :JL; -F-Lj .&1

                                                          ~ ~ t; ;t~::'..l

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /

14. Umayya ibn Makhsha ~ narrates, ''A person was eating and did not
take Allah's name until only a morsel remained. When he raised it to his
mouth he said, 'In the name ofAllah, at the beginning ofit [meal] and at
the end of it [meal]: The Prophet.® laughed and said, 'Satan continued
to eat with him until he took Allah's name, upon which Satan vomited
all that was in his stomach'" (Abu Diiwud, Abmad).

The act of Satan vomiting the food can be taken in its literal sense or can be interpreted
figuratively in that the blessing that the person was being deprived of returned to the
person's food after he took the name of Allah (Mirqiit al-mafiitib 8:38).
140 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

15. 'Abdullah ibn Mas'iid ~ narrates, "In the battle of Badr, three of
us shared one camel. Abii Lubaba and 'All ibn Abi Talib ~partnered
with the Messenger of Allah ~- When it was the Messenger's turn to
walk, the two would say, 'We will walk on your behalf He would reply,
'You are neither stronger than me, nor am I in less need of reward than
you"' (Baghawl, Shar~ al-Sunna, Bazzar).

This ]:ladlth expresses the compassion the Messenger ofAllah~ had for the Companions
and the attention he held toward Allah (Mirqat al-mafati~ 7:458).

~4\j..P~IJ~~·· :~l :Jl9~J~41~~~~J.~~J (,i) ,... y.i           ""o
   'jj/  ,....  ;.  _.... ,.....,....     _j.,.....

                                                     / "'  /

/~ ~lj -~ ~) .~u ~ dl;t :Jw .~l4J1 ~ :~ l~ -~:.j//

16. 'Uqba ibn 'Amir ~narrates, "Upon meeting the Messenger ofAllah
~' I asked him, 'Where does salvation lie?' He answered, 'Control your
tongue, let your home contain you, and weep over your sins"' (Tirmidhi,

A~mad).

[A] This ]:ladlth offers three simple acts by which one can remain at peace in this world
and attain salvation in the Hereafter. First, by controlling the tongue, a person will
speak only when necessary, and thereby refrain from many sins like the use of foul
language, backbiting, and slandering. Second, by remaining within the confines ofone's
home and leaving only when necessary, a person will be safeguarded from the many
trials prevalent outside. Finally, by showing remorse through shedding tears, a person
will be allowed to realize the nature of his actions and rectify them, making him more
conscious of what he does in the future.
                                                                               STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 141

                0~                                            y.            / / y.              \ ,... ,. / / ~                                                   tf.(
·F _y ,w) ~~ ~ ..S1~ :&1 J~) ~ :J~ ~ J~ 41-i') ~j ,....,...,$ ///

                                                                                                                            /                /

          .:;;            /     ,.       .:;                      ;.        /        /          0                        /     ,.....,.....        /0          /
;~::-; ~J ~ 41 ~ :&1 J~) ~j\.:.9 -~P ci..:ill ~_;\11 ~ ~~

~  CJ~)                /  ~fl   -.J~         ~  ~~                f:_x   ~  ~);j1       y.      ~                     :J~   ,.:_;~I                 /          ,Lfi::~

                    ji                1:\                                               41                                                         (:t

17. 'Ali ~ narrates, "The Messenger of Allah ~ was praying one night
when he placed his hand on the ground and a scorpion stung him. He
struck it with his slipper and killed it. Upon finishing, he said, 1\llah
curse the scorpion! It does not make any distinctions between one
engaged in prayer and one not in prayer; or he said, 'It does not make
any distinctions between a prophet and a non-prophet: He then called
for some salt and water, placed them into a container, and poured the
mixture over the area of his finger which had been bitten. All the while,
he stroked the affected area and recited the mu'awwadhatayn [Siirat
al-Falaq and Siirat al-Nas] over it, seeking refuge in Allah" (Ibn Maja,

Bayhaqi, Shu'ab al-imiin).

                                                                  ~~                            ~                                                                 ~~ jl
                                                                                                             ·
                                                                  ~                                             /
41 .41 :Jill .~·~t r-L·~ ~                                                  "~~~
                .J.-                -I ..                                            J,l                              -~*~     ~::~                                     F-  F-
                                                                            ..~            F-
                                         /                                     _..,          /                                                                          /   /

:J~ -~~;;.; ..!ll~ ~ ~141 J~) ~ :~ ~41 ~14.11 ~ 0i ~ ~J cl:ii ,..., ...- ~ y. ,... ,... 1 , ,.... '(Z'oJ. J.                                       ,..... ,..
                                                                  ,...,                            0Z" I ,.;; ,...,                                                         o ,/'

                             /                  ,...........                                                       /  /                         /

18. Usama ibn Zayd d,!;, narrates, "The Messenger of Allah jj, sent us to
[fight] a group of people from the Juhayna tribe. I came upon a person
and was about to spear him, when he shouted, 'There is no deity but
142 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Allah: [Without paying any heed] I speared him and killed him. When
I returned and informed the Prophet~ [about the incident], he said,
'You killed him even though he had testified that there is no deity but
Allah?' I said, '0 Messenger of Allah, he did that only to save himself
He asked, 'Why did you not split his heart [to verify your assumption]?"'

(Bukhiirl, Muslim).

The Companion Usama ibn Zayd ~ either thought that the man had made the proclama-
tion of faith to spare himself from being killed or that the act of declaring faith in that
circumstance was not accepted. It is impossible to penetrate a person's heart and discern
what it contains. Therefore, any testimony of faith has to be taken at face value [unless
there are some external actions found which clearly contradict it]. Imam Nawawl states
that the ]:ladlth means we are responsible only for the outward and what comes of the
tongue. We have no way of knowing what the heart contains (Mirqiit al-mafiitlb 7:11).

;L.,Q.;p i rsY:>- ,.,,....;.;. ,.....,,....,.;;,0~

19. Abu Hurayra ~ narrates, "A person demanded payment of a debt
from the Messenger of Allah~ in a very harsh manner. The Compan-
ions intended [to prevent him], but the Messenger of Allah @!. said, 'Let
him be, as he who has a right is entitled to speak. Purchase a camel and
give it to him: The Companions [after making inquiries] said, 'We can
only find one older [and more superior to it] in age: The Messenger ~
said, 'Purchase it and give it to him, for the best among you is he who
discharges his debt in the best manner"' (Bukharl, Muslim).

The creditor was either a non-Muslim or someone from among the desert Arabs. Ibn al-
Malak explains that the one whose debt is not repaid has the right to make a complaint
and admonish the debtor for the delay (Mirqiit al-mafiit!b 6:n8).
                                                                                      STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 143

                                                                                                                 /

                                                             /  ,....                                               ,.... 0 / ,.... ;._....
~ ~~I JY::J J\.4.9 ·~ ~.:i.; i js:.;. (i ~I J;ii 1~1 ~_;~:; ~ ..... ;.::;...... ,.,....,....     0       ;.                                            -:;

.&I                                                                                                                                                 jj

                                                                                      ?                                      /

Y'"~"JJ' / J\.4.9 'i / 'li J' / ,-J ;./,....,,.........   /            ,.....             .....                     0 ,,...                            .;;;
                      ~L/~'~'} ~ I y,o~~..)""'::' .&1                                            Y'"~"J      :~-~~I
                                                                                                         L'                                   ··       .::1::.'

                             .....                                                                        *

                                                                               .....                                            .....        .....

                                           ~~~~~:;;.            ~~ ""' ,,...   ~~""' o""  ~ljl:;~,i""            :~j .;;;    ~""             ;.     ~;;; ~I

                                                                                                                                             .&1

20. Umm Salama narrates that she and Maymiina ~were in the com-
pany of the Messenger of Allah i\j. when Ibn Umm Maktiim ~ came
and presented himselfto him. The Messenger of Allah~ ordered, "Veil
yourselves from him:' Umm Salama asked, "0 prophet of Allah, is he
not blind and unable to see us?" The Messenger i\j. replied, ''Are you two
[also] blind and unable to see him?" (Abu Dawud, Tirmidh!, A~mad).

Some scholars have inferred from this ]:ladith that it is unlawful for a woman to look

at a man [just as it is unlawful for a man to look at a woman]. However, the more

sound opinion is that it is permissible for a woman to look at a man, from above the

navel and below the knees if it is without lust. This permissibility is established from a

number of texts, one being the ]:ladith of 'A'isha ~, in which she was allowed to watch

the Abyssinian men perform when they visited Madina, and the second, the permis-

sibility of women coming to the masjid and praying behind the men in the masjid of

the Messenger llJ!.. If it were not permissible for women to look at men they would not

have been permitted to pray behind the men. Furthermore, it is women who have been

instructed to be veiled from men and not men from women. The above ]:ladith has thus

been explained as highlighting the more cautious and pious approach (MirqiU al-mafati~

6:284). Some people, however, attempt to use the narration of 'A'isha ~ as a blanket

justification of women's attending and watching male sporting events and other such

activities in which well-built young men participate. This cannot be justified through

this ]:ladith because ofthe potential.fitna in such attendance and the general exhortation

in the ]:ladith ofUmm Salama~.
* ~L5 :J~ ~ -:,:; 41 J..;, ~~ ~f ~ J~41 ~) ~~; ~f :;:; (r,)
                                                                                                             ./                        /

~~  ~l        :4-~~>-L;,            ~w     .~l:b.L;~                           ~:il                 ~.:U1        ;L:;-  .~q1                 ~;                   /

                                                                                                                                                    0Gi;1

           /          /                                                                                                                             /
144 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

~~;sfio l ~ ~ ;J1; J1 ~~ ~~4 ~~ ~l :~)-\1foo1 ~li,J ~~4
         ,..,..,....,.....                  ,.....                                     ,....,..., /               ,.....                      ,.....     ,...,..... ,.....

                            2 _9. ~ 0 !!!-
~lli ~~~I ~4 J- ~l :Jlli ~~G;>L9 ;J1; J. 0\;.L ~ ~]-..9 ,..... ,.,...,..... ,.... _9.,.....00,.... ,.....,...../0 ;,....          / / ,.....          '                 / .....

/                               ,.....              ,..... ,.....                                                         ,.....

                                                                          ' .........         J.        ,. ,....                  0 o,..... /            0 j.
                                ~~~~-~1}.4\~fl~~ :~~\ 0 .,
                                                    / ,,

21. Abu Hurayra 4;0 narrates that the Messenger of Allah ~ related,

"There were two women, both ofwhom had their sons with them. A wolf

came and took away one son. [Then there arose a dispute between the

two.] The companion of the bereaved mother [the other woman] said,

'Indeed it took your son: But the other woman argued, 'No, it took your

son: They presented their case before Dawiid ~1, who decided that the

remaining child belonged to the elder ofthe two women. As they left him,

they saw Sulayman ~1, son ofDawiid ~1, and reported the incident to

him. He ordered, 'Bring me a knife and I will divide the child between

you: The younger one cried, 'No! Allah have mercy on you! He is her

son: Sulayman ~~ [became satisfied by this that the child belonged to

the younger woman and] decided in her favor" (Bukhari, Muslim).

The dispute between the two women either stemmed from the fact that the two boys
resembled one another or that one of the women was lying. In deciding whose son it was,
Dawiid :');;§\ may have decided in favor of the elder women according to the principle
that "the one in whose hand is the property is more rightful over it:' Or he may have
seen a resemblance between her and the boy. However, using a more reasoned approach,
Sulayman :');;§\ anticipated that the real mother would sacrifice her claim to the baby in
order for it to remain untouched. She would realize that in this way the baby would re-
main alive and she could po~sibly continue to see it, even though it would be in someone
else's custody. Therefore, when the younger women cried out, Sulayman ~~ ascertained
that she was the mother and decided in her favor (Mirqat al-mafati~ 9707).

   ,.;;  ,.... y.           0:              .J.                    ,....  ,.....,...,                   I,.....;. ,...            ,....
~,J ~ 41 ~ ;t1 J~) ~ :JL!:.:; Jw 41 ~)a~; !j-,J (n)

Jlli .j;-,1 )-t,J -~)141 J~) ~ :Jlli -~~ ~ j;-) ~;l;-11 ~· ~
                                                    ,....                                                         ,....                                  ,.... ",.....
                                                                              STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 145

                                                                ~}·dl~ ""' ""',... J.J.o

22. Burayda ~narrates, "The Messenger ofAllah~ was walking when a
person on a donkey approached and said, '0 Messenger ofAllah, please
be mounted: He then moved toward the rear. The Messenger ~ [wish-
ing to clarify a principle to him refused to sit at the front and] said, 'No,
you are more entitled to the front seat of your animal unless you grant
it to me: He said, 'I have granted it to you: Thereafter, the Messenger
~ mounted it" (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi).

This indicates the humility and truthfulness of the Messenger~ in that he was prepared
to sit behind the Companion, and only sat in front of him after he explained that the
owner had more right to sit in front unless he willingly gave up his place (Mirqat al-
mafattb 7:460).

   r;i                /               /  ~                                    ;;~'        \     ,                       /
   . :;.3 ,... ;.
~ .&1 ~ .&1 JY:) ~~ ~) 0i ~ J~ .&1 ~~ ~~                                                                                       (rr)

/               /                                                                                           ~

                                                                                                         /

2-Pi ..Ll3 Jl ;.

JY:)
   / .........                           :JW &(.;. :JW ~ ~ .....
                ~4../ 98/\..Ll./ J-:     / ""'""" / ..... /                                  \     / J.              ::1:~3 ..... ...... /..,;
   JW
                                                                              ,4_9\.j

                   /     .... /                                               ?        /                 ...... ,                    ,---

                                         .u.. u-J r - J u.;. ;. J. ,.;; ..... 0 .J. ,... 0         ,.;;              /     ;.  ;;;;
                                         c·.J':rq ~'I                                        l;. / :: l :~ /               .&I ~ l -:.. .&1
                                                                           /  l.'Jf\ J.t                                                                      /
                                                                                                               ,...
                                                                              ,...,., /

23. Anas ~ narrates, "A person asked the Messenger of Allah ~ for a

conveyance, so he said, 'I will give you the offspring of a she-camel to

ride on: The person remarked, 'What will I do with the offspring of a

she-camel?' The Messenger of Allah~ replied, 'Are not all camels the

offspring of she-camels?"' (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi).

Irrespective of how much an animal or person progresses in age, it will always remain
the offspring of its parents. This is what Allah's Messenger jt. had in mind when light-
heartedly telling the person, "I will give you the offspring of a she-camel to ride on:' By
this, it is clear that any camel the Messenger ij. would give the man, despite it being
fully matured, would no doubt be the offspring of its mother. This is an example of the
truthful humor ofthe Messenger ililo with his Companions (Mazad al-raghibin 98). This
was also a subtle way in which the Messenger ij. cautioned the person to think more
deeply before making a statement (Mirqat al-mafattb 8:620).
146 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

                                      ;~ :J~ ~                                                      ~) .. ,....                                                                   ~)        ~:,
J1J;-'1 jt.;541 ~~.. /                                                                                                   ~..)/ -~~~                         ~j!                                             (n)
                                                                                                                                                                                  ........
               /

      .....    ~     ...... .....     /       0                  ;. /          / ,......                          ,....                0              ...... .....     .;;                  / y.                   .;;;;
~~~~~.),:: ;;l~l:JW,~ji:J~:JW~j~.&l~
                                                    ,                     ,

                  -rOI ~~f~~_;.~~~ ~~~ -~~~~~ i~~-.J~ .~;

                  /                              /                     ,.....  /                                                                      <If$             ......                                  ""

24. Abu Ayyub al-An~iiri ~ narrates, ''A man came to the Prophet

Jj. requesting him for some brief advice. The Messenger ~ advised,

'Perform prayer as though you are about to leave this world, and do

not utter anything for which you will later need to apologize, and have

firm conviction not to entertain the slightest hope for the possessions

of others"' (Af:zmad).

Perform each prayer with complete concentration, devotion, and sincerity, leaving aside
all other thoughts and turning yourself with single-minded attention toward Allah as
though it were your final prayer. The J:tadith also cautions in regard to speaking-that
you not speak without thought, turning what you have said into a burden not only in
this world but in the next. Last, if you avoid interest in other's possessions they will
begin to love and honor you. If you heed these three advices, you will gain the peace
of this world and the next (Mazad al-raghibzn 98).

                                                                                                 """"'
                                      ~I"                        ~ ~ ~ _..,,                                                    l            ;.       ~~ ,....         ~t/                  ~:,
C3 J Jt_;5 ~I ~Y..:)
                                                             ,                                  :JL;                                         .&1                    ,                                  (ro)

                                                                                                                                                                               ~

                                      / / //                           0                    ,.             ,...., ~                       /           0                :;;                  ...... ,.              .,;;
J,.J' -,'","J~. ~t                                  -, ·~1                     Y. J~',i"W.<:?I'.f'"t                                                  ~I·              :::1.'~'   ~                             I:.
                                      JW                 ....                                                                                ;t,;..                    1 -J       ,.        .&1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               I.J""'"'
                                                                               ,....                                     ,....
                                                                                                                                                            /

                  ,.... ;;;;                  / ;.               :;;                        .J.                / ...........                                r:;                   / ;.                 ,;;
~y~')'j :~:} ~ .&1 ~~I JY..:) JW .~ ~ :~:J ~ .&1 ~~I

~l :~ Jw ~~; ~ ~.:, ~ 41 ~ .&1 JY..:) ~l ~ .j~ J;.. ~)5p .~y_;
/                                                      ,....                                                                           /
                                                                                                 /

                                   0                   -;:;           ...... ,....o ......              0      /                   "'        0 .....                J. / ,... ,....                         0
~~lj ~I~~~~~ ~JA.ll ~j;lll~ ~ :~~ 'j ~~I~~ / ,....
                                                                               'jj

      .,....o        p                   ""'        ,... ,.....  .::;                 ,..... J.            ;:                      J.                 .,.. ,... ,...._.., ""'               ;.o
i JA.ll ~ ~);i:J :JL; ·~:J ~ .&1 ~~I JY..:) JL; \2 ji 0.:;JI ~;1~:}

25. Anas ~ narrates, "We were once in the masjid with the Messenger
                                                                     STORIES & ACCOUNTS /::::A 147

of Allah ~' when a desert Arab came in and began to urinate standing.
The Companions of the Messenger of Allah ~ shouted out to him to
stop at once, but the Messenger of Allah ~ ordered, 'Do not stop him;
let him continue: They thus left him to finish. Then the Messenger ~
called him and said, 'It is not appropriate that a masjid be polluted by
urine and filth. Masjids are only made for the purposes ofremembering
Allah, the performance of prayer, and recitation of the Qur'an:" Anas
~ states that the Messenger ~ said these exact words or something to
their effect, and adds finally that the Messenger ~ gave instructions to
a Companion who then brought a pail of water and poured it over the
polluted area (Bukhar!, Muslim).

The Companions~ were prohibited by the Messenger~ from interrupting the stranger
in the middle of relieving himself, because that could have either proven harmful to
his health, or it could have caused greater commotion and the impurity would have
splattered around rather than being confined. The Messenger of Allah ]j, waited until
the man had finished and then beautifully demonstrated to the Companions ~ how
one should gently admonish and teach a person, especially if he is ignorant of certain
laws and etiquette. This does not mean that one is not permitted to admonish someone
or to express anger. At times, the situation may demand such; hence, the Messenger of
Allah ~ expressed his displeasure with Mu'adh ibn Jabal ii> when he lengthened the
prayer as an imam causing inconvenience to others (Mazad al-raghibln 99).

26. Talq ibn 'Ali~ narrates, "We went as a delegation to the Messenger
148 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

of Allah flli!,, swore allegiance to him, and performed prayer behind him.
We informed him that we had a church in our land, and we asked him
for the remainder of his ablution water. He called for some water, made
ablution and rinsed his mouth, and then poured it into a skin-vessel for
us. He then bid us farewell, saying, 'When you reach your land, demol-
ish the church, sprinkle the site with this water, and establish a masjid
upon if We voiced concern about the water evaporating, our destination
being far, and the heat being severe. He said, 'Keep adding water to it
for it will but enhance it in its goodness"' (Nasa'i).

The last line of the J:tadith indicates that the mixing of the old water with the new al-
lowed the blessing of the old to transfer to the new, just as the original water had been
blessed after dripping off the limbs of the Messenger ill'>. The J:tadith master Ibn I:Jajar
al-'Asqalani states that this incident indicates [the permissibility of] deriving bless-
ing from the leftovers of the Messenger ill'> and traveling with it to other areas. This is
similar to transporting the water ofZam Zam from Makka to Madina [and around the
world] so that people can benefit from it (Mirqat al-mafatl~ 2:419). [A] The church, as
the narration mentions, belonged to the tribe. It had probably fallen out of use because
the tribe had converted to Islam and were now in need of a masjid, so the Messenger of
Allah ~ explained to them how they could convert it into a masjid.

27. Juwayriyya $, narrates that the Messenger of Allah ~ left her early
one morning, having performed the Fajr prayer, while she was in her
place of worship. The Messenger of Allah~ returned after mid-morn-
ing to find her still sitting [engaged in remembrance]. He asked, "Have
you remained sitting in the same position that I left you?" She answered,
                                                                    STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 149

"Yes:' He said, "After leaving you, I recited four phrases three times which
would outweigh all that you have recited today: 'Glory be to Allah and [I
begin] with praise ofHim to the number ofHis creatures, in accordance
with His good pleasure, to the weight of His throne, and to the extent
of His words"' (Muslim).

This }:tadith indicates that the remembrance in which one keeps the Remembered One
 present in the mind and heart is superior to any number of formulated repetitions that
 are devoid of such a state. The same is with the recitation of the Qur'an-one verse
 recited with complete mental presence, reflection, and understanding is superior to
 the recitation of many verses without. Hence, the Messenger liJ!. was encouraging the
 mother of the believers to attain a higher status of presence and concentration in her
 remembrance. Otherwise, it is clear that any words uttered by the Messenger $ are
 superior to those spoken by others (Mirqiit al-majatfb 5:129).

~     ;.;~l~j).&1J~)~:~)JliJLi~J~41~)~;8U.f~~                                                   ..                              ..              (rA)
      ""' /
                       /                                                                               ~                            ~

                                                       ~..,,.....          ~~ ~r,?.o.~ 9- ~I.J" .
      ..r. . . ..r. IS · ,__s.s- · ,~ ;.""' '""
                          ~ L',.... ~ ,:..-.: ~ -'                                                                                        ~ l' ~.Jo.

                                                                                                                                       .....
.. .. .. .&IJ' JlAH .&1 , . · \..P.&I /
      ..r-'J                                                                                        /

                                                                   'lfll/     ""'                                       ......                  //       ""

   ,         ,..... / / ' /          .,. . _  -;;;     / / ,....,,....     /  ...... -;;;....,            ......  -;;;                 ,.... ,       zj
~~ JL; ~.15 ~~:UI ':J~~ :JW ~I;G ;.;\ 1).9 ~~ :~~ ~ .&1 ~

28. Abii Qatada ~narrates, ''A person asked the Messenger of Allah iii,
'Ifl am killed in the path ofAllah, having fought with fortitude, with the
hope of reward, and continually advancing and resisting retreat-will
Allah forgive me my sins?' The Messenger of Allah iii replied in the
affirmative. When the person had turned to leave, the Messenger iii
called out to him and said, 'Yes, except debt. This I have [just] been
informed by Jibrll"' (Muslim).

Because repayment of debt is the right of another person, a debtor must settle it with
his creditor before Allah will forgive him. However, the sins against Allah are forgiven
by Allah for a true martyr (Mirqiit al-mafiitib 6:123) .

 .. .. ~ .&1 ..... ;.~ iii                    ~\                                          ;.
                    .&1   J~)                       ~  01~;      / ......  ~  J\ ~              ~~ ~~.....                     /       ~~       (r'\)
                    ..... .....                                                           .&1
                                                             :Ju                                                        U.i

/

                                                                                                       ~                        ~

      ;. _.. ,...                ""           J~) ~ ~ J~~~ ~~I ~~ /
                                                             .J. o.J. ,..... ,., 0 ""' \
      :JL; ;i'l :JL; 0i :Sl9 ,.,                                                                    J. ,....
~ji ~:.;;.:.Ji                                                                                                                  o ,., ...-,... ..:1
150 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

41_?~'j 0l~l o'J~ ~ :J\.9 ·.J. ;j :~,.US .!J;~ c;.) ~~ 41-.s~ /                                                                                                              ~/
       0              _j.O                    /             /     /          //                    O                   J. 0 J. ';!- J. /                ;             O/                                            I)

    ,..... ,..... /             /                ,...,....                                            ,..... /          ,.....                 ..... ,.....                          /        /                         /

                                           :~~;.                                     ,.... 0                    /       ~(_:J1                                    )'~ ~~ ,....                   .....              ~

                                                               .__,..;j'JI                                              /
·J;j J .!.lJ J .!.lJ J;-'J ~6;; :J~ ..                                                        ..                   ~;J                         ..
                                                                                                                                                                          ,.....
                                ,.......-                            /                          /                                                .....
                                                                                                                                                                                           /

y/  :J~   ,..j ; j,..... ,....  :~         ~     .~)1~:;_~~'j._;iiJ1,:                                                              : .. ~~~~~~ft'J~~l
                                                                                                                                    ,.....              ,..... ,....
                                                       /                  /  /                                                                                                                                          /

                      y. o.J.                                                                                                                      J. oj.                                                               o
                                                       ""',... ....-         ~ ·<);j :~ d~ o ,....,..., "" ,..... ,.....
                                                                                                                                              0
:J\.9 J.l ;tl Ui. 'i :J\.9 0l5 0lJ J_;J1 ,~;j :~ -~~ ~ r ...-
                                                                                                                                                                             ,..... ,..... 0                    "'

          ,.....,...                       ?                                              /                                     ,.....,..                                                        /

                                                                                                                   ~~rs~~~OIIf~~

29. Abii Dharr ~narrates a lengthy l).adith in which he states, "I asked
the Messenger of Allah ~ to advise me. The Messenger of Allah ~ said,
'I exhort you to fear Allah for it is the finest adornment for all your
[worldly and religious] affairs: I said, 'Advise me further: He said, 'Hold
fast to the recitation ofthe Qur'an and the remembrance of Allah Most
Great and Glorious, for it will mean that you will be remembered in the
heavens, and it will be light for you on earth: I said, 'Advise me further:
He said, 'Observe long silences, for it repels Satan and will assist you in
your religious matters: I said, 'Advise me further: He said, 'Refrain from
excessive laughter, because it deadens the heart and takes away the light
of the face: I said, 'Advise me further: He said, 'Speak the truth, even
though it may be bitter: I said, 'Advise me further: He said, 'Do not be
intimidated by the rebuke of others in the way of Allah: I said, 'Advise
me further: He said, 'Let your own weaknesses disinterest you from the
weaknesses of others"' (Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-fman, Ibn Ifibban).

                      / J.                                                J~~ ~ ~~ ;;~} ~'J (r·) .....
0i JL;; S?.i 41 j..P ;t1 41 :J\.9 ~'J ~ / / -;;; -;;;                                              .:;,....                                                .....             ,.....
                                                                                                                       ' ,..,;. ,....

                                                                                                                                            /                             /

/         0           .....     ,...... ,..... ,.... ,....     0             ..... ,....              //           ;.           ,.                      , ,.....      J.     0                          ,.....      ,..... ......
:J.-9 -~~ ~ .!JL>i .!3)~ :J\.9 ,~i ~~~J 41 :IJ-11.9 ~~I ~ 0_J~xi
    /                 /                                           ,.....                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                      STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 151

:ili 9 j ~/. 01) -~1                             ;.
                                                                   ~           5\S ~l :J~ ~Jj.9i ;. y...-' ~ ~i/ 515 ~l ~i/ji/
                                                 J)                                                                                        ,....

       /                                                                                /                                                         /

                                                                                                                                .;.;_; JjZ 9 ,r;0 ,......, ,,,.              ,

                                                                                                                               ~                    ~                ~

30. Abu Hurayra ~narrates that the Messenger of Allah ~ asked [his
Companions], "Do you know what backbiting is?" They replied, "Allah
and His Messenger know best:' He said, "Backbiting is to say something
about your brother which he dislikes:' Somebody asked, "What if what
I say about him is true?" The Messenger of Allah ~ said, "If what you
say about him is true, then you have backbitten him, if not, then you
have slandered him" (Muslim).

Ghfba, "backbiting;' does not only refer to saying about another Muslim something that
he would dislike, but also includes mockingly imitating his behavior or gait, such as
walking with a limp or in droopy fashion, in order to reveal some defect of his (MirqiU
al-mafatfl:t 8:572). [A] Furthermore, saying something hurtful to a Muslim's face does
not justify saying it in front of others.

.. :~-;;;.J                                      ~ ..,;;                                                              .J.       ~~ ,...
                       ~,...    -'                           .&1   ;.          ,...,,.....,           ~         JI ~                       y!~    :;.J          (;,)
                       ,...                                  ,...                                                     .&1       ,... ~/
                                .&1                                JY:)        JL; JL;

...- ,..._....                  .,.... ,... ,... ,... ,... ,...                o ,....          ,...            ,... ""           I -;;;          ""'- _,.           "
:Jw·~~~.i5.JI.i5~f...;. ~~~i :i~I~J~Jl~.J}.&I__;.ji
                                ,..                                                     ,...                             ,...
                                                                                                                                  /

                                                             0     ,... /         .......... /        ,/              -;;; "" / , ..... /                       ...
0·l! r-::-J. :JL; ·. .r- rt":01·..:/ :; // ,...                                0                                                                  :;

       -~ -~~;;~ ~ t"-':r:.·"t":l                                          ~~ ~·1- ~· I~ l \.j~ .!J. ~'                                                              L'
                                                                                                                                                                .J.
.....           .....                ,...                 /                I#                             ,...                                    ,... ..... /

                                                                                                                      J tJ .k~,..9...""~'L..:. -;;; ;~~ ~J .....

                                                                                                                                           ~

31. Jabir ~ narrates that the Messenger of Allah .~ said, ''Allah gave

orders to Jibril ~~ to upturn a city with its inhabitants. Jibril said, '0

Lord, among them lives so-and-so your servant, who has not disobeyed

you in the slightest: Allah ordered, 'Upturn the city over him as well

as them, for never once did his face change [in anger] for My sake"'

(Bayhaql, Shu'ab al-fman).

Enjoining good and forbidding wrong is of the utmost importance. "Never once did
his face change..." means that if a person feels anger at least once for the sake of Allah
upon the evil around him, he may be protected (Mirqat al-majatf/:1 8:885).
152 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

J.P J_;,:; rlj ~J ~ 41 ""' -;;:;,.... ;.   -;;:;  ~\ /  -;;;""'  ~   \ ,....-'           ~~ ,....              :~

                                                        0i          JL;; 41                                                        J.l           J-J    (n)

                                                                                                         /                         /             /

0/  ,....           ,...            ,....                        ..... ___ ,...,                         0     -;;:;'    /            ,....,...                    ,

01 G_:.;t JJ ~~ J_;,:; ~ ::~ ~~ Jw -~~: ~ ~ ;t JjJ rw ~ ~
                                                                                                                                                    "'
                                                                                  0t                        /

... / -;:; ... ,..                                / :;; 0! _.:;
1.W ur ..!.Ll ~ .1;t-:.:'-.1 w.-1/.<.r':JI· t·.i.. J lj\ ~/J .t..i.. J J~ :Jw.r.1.:r:-::J/ ~.0                 .... / /     .....          ....         / ..... /     .....

                          . "' /
                                                  /                                   /                                  ,. ..... /
                                                                                                      /

                                                                                                                                                                      ,....
                                                                                                               lfs'JJc:;~:~

32. 'Abdullah ibn Mas'iid ~narrates that the Messenger ofAllah~, after
sleeping on a [woven] mat, arose with marks imprinted on his body. Ibn
Mas'iid ~ exclaimed, "0 Messenger ofAllah, ifonly you would order us
to spread something [softer] for you or prepare something [more com-
fortable] for you:' He ~ replied, "What mutual interests have I and the
world. I am in the world like a rider who takes shade under a tree, then
resumes his journey, leaving the tree behind him" (Tirmidhi, Ibn Maja).

                                           ~                                      0 ,.,                        ..... J.               :;;               ;.
~i ,~\ ~J.l:;;.; ~I ~ :~ ·~J ~ J.P ~\ ,.... ..... //
                                                         ,....                              -;;:;                                                       J_;,)

    :JW                                                 J_;,)                                                               41

                                                     )JI..!J: ~ ;\ :CJLh))JI ~ ~ ~ _,J .!1!

33· Abu Mas'iid ~narrates, "I was beating a slave of mine when I heard
a voice behind me saying, 'Know, Abii Mas'iid, that Allah has greater
power over you than you have over your slave: I turned to see that it
was the Messenger of Allah ~. I exclaimed, '0 Messenger of Allah, I
will free him for the pleasure of Allah: He ~ said, 'If you had not done
so, the Hellfire would have scorched you; or he said, 'The Hellfire would
have touched you" (Muslim, AbU Dawud).

The scholars agree that it was not necessary in this case for the Companion to free
his slave. However, it was a recommended act, and the Messenger of Allah !:l1. gave
him the good news of it being accepted as a retribution for his wrong action (Mirqat
al-mafati~ 6:520).
                                                                                                             STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 153

J..P Y.,;;;                                       ._a;~ ...- oJ.                    -"' ,....  t;~:~I J~                ;.    ~~u--~                                             ~J

.&I                 .&1  JY..:)                                                   :Jli                                  .&I   ... ,.... ""                             J.l                    (rt)

                    ,.... ....                                                                                                                                         /         ,....

.....        ,....       ..... ; .       ,.... /  /               ..... 0 /                    ,....             ,....        /;.                  .... / /                             .:;;         ....
~~~ .&~ ~Ą .&1 ~~-~ .&1 ~I r~ ~ :JW ,t_:Y,: ~J ~

,.... I                                         ,.., ,.... , ;. 0 r;1,.... ,....                                        ,...                       ,...         _....            ,.... ,..           o,....

0i ~..:. ;~,;1 _,J ~\t10i ~~J ·.&~ ~t;,:: :;::_~.11~0 ·.&1 Jl:,t; ~L
                                         .....                                                 ,.... ,.... /                                             ,....            ,....

                                                  ...- o; 0                                                                                                     .e .:;; _....    .J.          -;:; o ""'

                                                             .........
       ~~ ~J r'>U"YI ~~ -~ .&1 ~ ~..~ '11 !.l.JA ~ ~..~ fJ..J.:iJ                              ,.... ,....,  ;.               ""' 0 ,....  o ,...

                         /                                                                                                    ..l9 , ,....,...                                                ;:::~          ,....

34· 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas ~narrates, "I was once behind the Messenger

of Allah ~' when he said, '0 Child! Be mindful of Allah and He will be

mindful of you. Be mindful of Allah and you will find Him before you.

Whenever you ask for anything ask it from Allah, and when you seek

assistance seek it from Allah. And know that if the whole of human-

ity were to unite in order to benefit you, they could not benefit you of

anything except as Allah has already written for you, and if they were

to unite to harm you in some way, they could not harm you, except as

Allah has already written for you. The pens have been lifted and the

scrolls have dried"' (Tirmidh!, A~mad).

"Be mindful of Allah and He will be mindful of you" has been understood to mean "be
 mindful of His commands by making good what He has ordered and refraining from
what He has prohibited:' In return, He will take care ofyou by protecting you from the
trials of this world and the punishments of the next-a just recompense. "You will find
 Him before you" means that you will always find Him at your assistance, that your affairs
 will be facilitated for you, or that you will attain the station of Perfection (il:zsan)-as
 though you see Him when you worship Him (see Q.adith 1 in this section).

   "Whenever you ask for anything ask it from Allah" because only He is the possessor of
 infinite bounties and the holder of the treasures of the universe, which reach a servant
 through His mercy and generosity. Ask of Him, for others do not have the power to
 benefit or harm anyone except by His leave. A Q.adith states, "Whoever does not ask
Allah, Allah is angered with him:' A poet says, ''Allah is angered if you abandon asking
 Him. And the human when asked is angered:'

   "The pens have been lifted and the pages have dried" is used to indicate that the
 decree of Allah is absolute and does not change. His knowledge is absolute, complete,
 and eternal and does not accept error, alteration, or change. Whatever has been written
154 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

and decreed by Allah before the creation of the universe and written by the Pen upon
the Tablet is final (Mirqat al-mafat!}:z 9:161). One's attention and reliance need only be
focused on Allah, because He is the One from whom comes all benefit and harm, and
there is no one else who has any say in this regard (Mazad al-raghib!n 105).

                                ,....                ""' p                   ...... ; /                    ..... ,.... / 0 /                                       /
-~ -~l>- ~~ 0~ ~I}-~~ ~l9 -~-) FL.J ~ ..... / ....- 0 ,.... ;.....-/                                                               .....  0           -;;;
      _:,; li.b:.l9
                                _:,;                                                                                            "

                                                                                                                                                   ~

       ,...,...  -;;;                                       -;;;                .....                      /                                          0
C?!;. ·FL.J ~ J..P ~~ ;~ ·._;~ ~ o~l-:-';~ ...../.....,.                                      /        ,.                .....     /;.                                               .....

    :JW                                          .&1

                   ,.... ,,...                                 ""'  ~,...    ~_:.; ,- ,.....

                 :JW                                        j_;
J?!;. .LA8? ·4;J1LA.:i.lj ~o~ .,....          o
                                                                                              ~iI )j               ,...         .,... I_J!);~ n~..U_.,....Y. o~

//                                                                  ?                                              ,...                                  .....     ,..... .........

                                /             ,.            -;;;       ,..,                   ~ ,.  /                    ..... :;         ,.... /               /  0 ,,..,
                                ).:.ll ~) ':JLJ84 ~~ 0i A.. ':J ~1 -~ :1:-W /
                                                                                                                                   :Jl;

                                                                             /                             ......               /

35· 'Abd al-Ra]:lman ibn 'Abdillah reports his father saying, "We accom-

panied the Messenger of Allah~ on a journey. At a certain point in the

journey, when the Messenger~ had left us to relieve himself, we saw a

bird [probably a red start] with two chicks. We took the chicks, which

caused the bird to spread and flap its wings. When the Messenger of

Allah ~ returned, he asked, 'Who has distressed this bird by taking her

chicks? Return them to her: He also saw an anthill which we had burned.

He asked who had burned it, so we informed him. He warned, 'It is not

for anyone to punish with fire except the Lord of Fire"' (Abu Dawud).

The Messenger of Allah~ instructed the Companions to return the chicks as a recom-
mendation and not as a command, because it was permissible to have taken them [as
food]. "It is not correct for anybody to punish with fire except the Lord of Fire;' i.e.,
Allah Most High. The reason is that burning is one of the worst forms of punishments,
which is why Allah has warned with it those who reject Him. Allah has blessed us with
fire in this world so that we may derive benefit from it and not use it as a punishment
against others (Mirqat al-mafatl}:z 7:106).
                                                                                                  STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 155

                       I)                  ,....  ,.....           0/            /     /                /      /           /                      /      ,...,.          /
t!i -~:'~ ;~ ~~i ;~ 0~ -~10~;.) ~~Y. -~L.;, ""'                 /

                       0lJ                                                   ""' /                             410;-9                                                              -"',....""
                           ,..,
                                                                       /                                                                             /

             J. _, 0 ""'                                               ~                                                                                 ;;;; ,.... ,.... .J.                  ""
_Ji t!ij ~~ ,~i ~ ~l;J10j.~1~) ~I ~10j.~;:::.; ~~Yo .,;;
                                 ,. ,.            o,                                   o o """ ,...                     ""' 0 o ,.,..

                                                                                                     (JL9)

36. 'Abdullah ibn 'Amr ~narrates that the Messenger ofAllah Ji; passed
by two groups in the masjid and commented, "Both of these groups are
engaged in good, but one of them is superior to the other. This group
is beseeching Allah and supplicating to Him. If Allah wishes He will
fulfill their prayers, and if He wishes He will deny them. As for the other
group, they are studying sacred law (or he said sacred knowledge) and
they are teaching the ignorant. Therefore, they are superior, and I have
not been sent but as a teacher:' He then sat with them (Diiriml).

[A] The Messenger of Allah lj. sat with the group studying sacred law to express their
superiority.

Jt;j . :J.) Jj..:) ~~~~.f-);~ :~L9 ~ 41 ~) ~~ 0//0 /                                              0        \   / ;.           /                      //                            J~{J"V)
                                    ,,.... , 0                               0/ /

/                                                                                                                                                        /

                                                                                                                                          /

   ,..... ;. ,.            /        ~ ,..                    ,         0 ;;;              ,.....                        / ,.....,..          ;;;             /       ,.            -;;;;
~y~.J ~Y.~~~ ~01 :&1 Jj..:) ~ :JW ·~) ~ 41 ~ :&1

                                                                          /   /

   ,.... ;.      ;;;;            ,                ,.... ,....,..,                   /     ,.. ,.... /                         0 .....                    0/                 /
~ 41 ~ :&1 Jj..:) JW ~~;~:~ L;i ~ ~~i) t+~: ~.ij ·~J.~:i)

~ ~~ r,--r..Y~ JJ.; ~~l ~~ ,..!1\ ~ r--r..Y~ ~~l _,o a,..... ...-:J. ,.,- ""'
                                 ;..J. ""' ...-                              ,... ,... ...- o                  ""' ;;;  ? 0 ,... ,... ,.....                     j.J. ""' _,. .J. ,.,

                                                                                0l5 0lJ                                      0l5                                   0_},)

                                                                /                                    /                                                                                             /

             iJ;;I";; "-""=/ -41J. ~J'J~';.~""'J,...W,,.....,.'... ~~'."..'J~J.u--,..,;-.JJ.~~~~_~;-~                                        ~ ~:-/ .·,u,I...
1:::..::../ '·" ~""4 ' -1'                                                                                                                                               o.:,.....-o .~""1' 1&
                                                                                                                                                                         --' /
,·

~ ~ JU ~~I~~ ~I ~?).;JI ~) i~ t;i :~) o,... / 0, ,.....,...0                                                                           /
                                                          /            0                  0                //           '                            ,.... _...., 0         .....         .,;

                                                                                                                        :Jt;;:&1 Jj.!
 156 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

37. 'A'isha ~narrates, "A person came and sat in front ofthe Messenger
of Allah ~ and asked, '0 Messenger of Allah, I have two slaves who lie
to me, cheat me, and disobey me, and in turn I am offensive to them and
beat them, so where do I stand with respect to them?' The Messenger~
replied, 'On the Day ofJudgment their cheating, disobeying, and lying
and your punishment will all be taken into account. If the punishment
you gave was equivalent to their offenses, then the matter will be judged
as even: neither in your favor nor to your loss. If the punishment was
not as severe as their offenses then the deficiency will be in your favor.
If the punishment was more severe than their offenses then the excess
will be taken as requital from you and given to them: The person then
distanced himself and began to whimper and weep. The Messenger of
Allah ~ asked him, 'Have you not read the words of Allah Most High:
"We shall set up scales of justice for the Day of Judgment, so that not a
soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least. And if there be (no more
than) the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to account) and
enough are We to take account?"' (Qur'an 21:47) The person said, '0
Messenger of Allah, I cannot think of any arrangement more suitable
for both myself and them than their separation. I make you a witness
that they are all free"' (Tirmidhl).

The importance the Companions $, held for the account in the Hereafter and their
willingness to forgo worldly possessions for fear of punishment cannot be lost upon
 anyone after reading this Q.ad!th (Mazad al-raghibln 107).
                                                        STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 157

r Gi .1J;i j;.U1 Gi Jlii .)-G t;_; ~li,/ / ~i/ :~'110...J..li~ ;.  .....  /         ..... ,                  /
                                     ,....  ~li ~i :~~i ....."'                                                          ~~

~I;~         .....             /  ~         J.      ,/    /        :~'110           -~i;.             --j~            /  ~~I

      di;i          &_~3i            ;LiJI  Jfi         Gi                   Jli.;                           li;i

r-50 till ~ ~1.&1_; d.1Ji_; IJS                 ~JJI           ~f:        JW  ·1:-f:\1..... ,....  ~  -:._;  ~  41       j_;,
                 ,....,                                     /
                                                                                                             /

                                             '~ _;Ł '-~~

                                                                             ~- ~
38. Anas 4$h narrates, "A group of three people visited the wives of the
Messenger of Allah~ to ask them about his [optional] worship [at
home]. When they were told about it, they found it to be little. They
said, 'Who are we compared to the Messenger of Allah ~; his future
and past mistakes have all been forgiven: One of them said, 'As for me,
I will spend my nights in prayer for as long as I live: Another said, 'I
will fast everyday without fail: The third said, 'I will distance myself
from women and never marrY: [Having been told of their visit] the
Messenger ~ came to them and asked, 'Are you the ones that said
such-and-such? By Allah, I am the most God-fearing among you and
the most God-conscious, but I fast as well as eat, I pray at nights and
sleep, and I also marry. Therefore, whoever diverts from my Sunna is
not from me"' (Bukharz, Muslim).

'Allama Tlb! has related that the three Companions were 'Ali ibn Ab! Talib, 'Uthman
ibn Ma~'iin, and 'Abdullah ibn Rawal;la, while some say Miqdad ibn al-Aswad in place
of'Abdullah ibn Rawal;la (may Allah be pleased with them).

   The Companions considered the worship of the Messenger~ to be little because they
had imagined that it would be much more. They did not think it was little in and of itself
but that it would be too little for them if that were all they did, because oftheir [inferior]
status. They did not realize that he was a role model and his practice was a source of
mercy for the entire Umma so that none would be overburdened in following him.

   In saying "Whoever diverts from my Sunna is not from me:' the Messenger ;l!ll rejected
the practice of celibacy. Allah says, "0 you who believe! Make not unlawful the good
things which Allah has made lawful for you, but commit no excess, for Allah loves not
those given to excess" (Qur'an 5:87). It is an achievement when a person is able to fulfill
the rights ofmarriage, along with fulfilling the rights ofAllah, and have reliance on and
158 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

consign one's affairs to Him (Mirqat al-mafiitil} 1:372-375). [A] This model of balance
was shown to us perfectly through Allah's Messenger ~.

J.P .)..P JL;; (i'\) -;;;; .&I J;. Y:~ ~ ~
                                                   :J[j ~ ..... .....  '   _,.J.       ~~ ,....      /      ~uP~~\0                  ~J

                                                                            .&1                      Z;L:
       .. /                                                                                   ,....  .....                    ,.... ,....
                          ,.....                                                                              /         /

       /     ,..... of$/  ?/                       .....  .....                        .....         / 0/ ;.               /      -;;;;           ,.., .J.
t-:::- / y '/ i r-J &/. .&1 ~
       ci/~    ~ ~'                                \-;~,.              ~ Y.            ('I~ 1/;i ~.                 '/ .;1~::: 1:'~/
            J                                                                           · (.)"':" ('-'              Y.
                 ./. /yo                                                                                         "

                                                                                    /

   1M  ,. /                       'jjj _,...,....  /                             ~     / ,...._,            J. J.O                /               J.        0
~y ~y ~~ 0ls" ~I JY:~ ~ :$~ JW -~j.WI ~ ~JJ 0~1

"              ?          ,.... ,..... 0
·:;.14 0LS' 0LJ .&1 :JW ~~ d~ -;;;; .....
                                                                     -;:;                                                     ;.           ,,..,
                                                                           ~I:J                      <.S~ ~.Ji .t:..ojlj 0;.      /                         : .....
                                                   ,;;lkJij
       . . . . . . . . . . ,.....                                          ,.,.               .............
   /                                                                                                                                                  /

39· 'Irba<;l ibn Sariya ~narrates, "The Messenger of Allah~ led us in
prayer one day, then turned and faced us. He spoke to us, advising us
with such eloquence and so movingly that we wept and [our] hearts filled
with fear. A person said, '0 Messenger of Allah, this appears to be your
parting advice to us, so do continue: The Messenger of Allah ~ said, 'I
enjoin you to fear Allah and to listen and obey, even if your leader is
an Abyssinian slave, because those ofyou who live after me will witness
many disputes. You must therefore follow my Sunna and the Sunna of
the rightfully guided Caliphs who followed the Straight Path. Hold fast
to it and clench onto it with your teeth and refrain from [religious] in-
novations, for all [religious] innovations amount to heresy, and every
act of heresy is clear falsehood"' (Abu Dawud, Tirmidhi, AI}mad).

Following the Sunna, or "Way;' of the rightfully guided Caliphs refers to the Sunnas
of Abii Bakr, 'Umar, 'Uthman, and 'Ali (may Allah be pleased with them). This was
because they rigorously conformed to the example set by the Messenger ~' along
with the fact that he ~ had said, "Caliphate will remain after me thirty years;' which
marked the end of 'Ali's caliphate. This is not to say that others after them would not
be considered valid caliphs, but that he ~ was only voicing his complete confidence
                                                                     STORIES & ACCOUNTS ~ 159

in the ability of these four to make correct inferences based on his example when is-
sues arose. This is why he made it obligatory to follow their Sunna as well as his Sunna
(Mirqat al-mafatl/:t 1:165).

~ ~.j ~ 41 ~ ~\.:_;;) .~ :5 :Jli ~ Jt;;41 ~~~~ ~J (~·)
           /                       .. ,.....          ,....                                                                       .. /            1fS

        o?_;; ':Jl4.j .fo e  0/ o  ,                  ..... ,...,.....                     , ;;;                       ;;; ,                                ;;;                     1
41._;;. L; ~JJ.J ~ ~~ ~ :JW ·-f-'1                                                                                                      ~ ~ J~
,.....                ,....                                             ,.....                                         ,.....           ........                 ?          ......

                                                                                                                               J. 0                    .J.          ,. . .
                             0i 41-fo I.JS 0i 'ft.;; ,.....
        0     :;;                                     ::;.;.~ ~ ~ ~jJ~~ d.~ ,.....0 .....         .....
  A':J:.; A':Jj ;.                                                                                                                      /
                      ~~':J
!3                                             ,....         .)t;.J\                                     ..... ,.....                                                       ,// ,....
                                                             ..... /
                                                                                                                               /

                   A1 \~ ~_P. ~ :Jli ,__;..01 ~ ~t 41 j_>..:~ ~ :~ ~ .~ ~
                   /                                                             ...... /                              /                                                            ..... ,.....

40. Mu'adh ~ narrates, "I was mounted on a donkey behind the Mes-

senger ofAllah~, separated from him only by the rear end ofhis saddle.

He said, '0 Mu'adh! Do you know the right of Allah over His servants

and the right ofHis servants over Him?' I said, 'Allah and His Messenger

know best: He said, 'The right of Allah over His servants is that they

should worship Him and not ascribe any partner with Him, and the right

of His servants over Him is that He should not punish anyone among

them who does not ascribe any partner with Him: I asked, 'Should I

not convey these glad tidings to the people?' He prohibited me from

doing so, saying, 'No, do not, because they might become complacent"'

(Bukharf, Muslim).

Those with corrupt motives hold on to this l,lad!th so that they can freely abandon their
religious responsibilities. Mu'adh ~did relay the l,lad!th to the people prior to his death
to save himselffrom being included among those who withhold sacred knowledge (see
l,lad!th 206), or because the people were no longer new to the religion, and their faith
had become firmly established in their hearts, eliminating the fear of complacency.

   Imam Bukhar! has inferred from this l,lad!th that it is permissible for a teacher or
scholar to confine certain types of knowledge to certain types of people out of fear that
it might be beyond their comprehension (Mirqat al-mafatf/:t 1:182).

   [A] It is possible that just as the compiler (Shaykh 'Ashiq Ilah!) selected the I:Iad!th of
Intention to begin the book so that readers may correct their intentions before studying
160 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

the Q.adiths, he selected this narration to end the book in order to leave the glad tidings
of Allah's mercy and Paradise in the mind of the reader. And Allah knows best.

   May Allah strengthen our love for Him and for His beloved Messenger and his
Sunna, forgive us our shortcomings, accept us for the service of His religion, and grant
us Paradise. Amin.

 This is the concluding Q.adith of this part and thus of the book. All praise belongs to
  Allah, the Lord of the Worlds, and blessings be upon the leader of His Messengers,

                 MuQ.ammad, and on his family, and all of his Companions.
FURTHER STUDY REFERENCES

l:fadlth Mishkatal-   Mirqatal-    Number in   Mirqatal-    Ma;ahir-e
                      Mafatt~ [1]  Mirqat [n]  mafatt~ [n]      Ifaq
Number       Ma~abl~

    PART 1: COMPREHENSIVE SAYINGS, SPRINGS OF WISDOM & SOUND ADMONITION

I:Iadith on  11       1:39         1           1:192        1:78
Intention

1            423      9:224        4966        8:701        4=542

2            194      5=37         2231        5:13         2:471

3            426      9:250        5008        8:740        4=564

4            429      9=279        5054        8:785        4=596

5            430      9:283        5062        8:791        4:601

6            12       1:70         5           1:140        1:96

7            444      9=384        5212        9:6s         4=716

8            432      9:297        soBs        8:812        4:613

9            434      9:319        5123        8:846        4:636
                      9=347        5158         97          4=670
10           439      4=175        1843                     2:232
                      1:318        281         4=351        1:273
11           162                                2:5

12           38

13           338      7=327        3895        7=446        3=779
                      8:182        4205        8:40         4=104
14           365

15           400      9=69         4666        8:450        4=367
                       2:6          381        2:94         1:323
16           44       9:166        4875        8:610        4=487
                      1:320         281         2:7         1:673
17           415

18           38

19           444      9=384        5212        9=65         4:716
                      5:151        2363        5=196        2:573
20           206

21           430      9:286        so66        8:795        4:604

22           451      10:40        5289        9=141        4=783

23           425      9=243        4995        8:729        4=558

24           411      9:134        4810        s:ss7        4=451

25           243      6:54         2799        6:42         3=58

26           243      243          2796        6:40         6:53

27           17       1:125        55          1:225        1:140
                      1:122
28           17                    50          1:220        1:136

29           431      9:291        5072        8:803        4:609

30           425      9=244        4999        8:731        4=559
164 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

I;Iadith  Mishkiital-  Mirqiital-    Number in      Mirqiital-    Ma:;;iihir-e
Number     Ma~iibi~    Mafiiti~ (1)  Mirqiit [II]  mafiiti~ [II]      ijaq
                15                                 1:14311:198        1:98
    31          15         1:108          6/33                        1:123
    32          15         1:108           33          1:198          1:98
    33          15         1:108           34          1:199          1:98
    34         327         1:108           34          1:199          3:711
    35         424         7:256         3758          7:326          4=552
    36         422         9:237         4985          8:720          4=535
    37         339         9:214         4954          8:685          3=781
    38         333         7=330         3899          7=450          3=750
    39         340         7:299         3841          7=402          3=791
    40          34         7=339         3925          7=465          1:246
    41         397         1:284          218          1:477         4=342
    42         183          9=45         4627          8:411          2:391
    43         110         4=333         2109          4:611          1:8o8
   44           251        3'153         1242          3=315          3:131
    45         418         6:100         2907          6:119         4:sos
    46         445         9:188         4908          8:644         4=720
    47         242         9=388          5218          971           3=49
    48         444         6:48           2781          6:31          4:716
    49         172         9:384          5213          9:66          2:286
    so          37         4:225         1946          4=434          1:263
    51         322         1:309          260           1:519         3=679
    52         329         7:222         3705          7:281          3=727
    53          34         7:269         3792          7=356          1:245
    54         206         1:284          217          1:476          2:569
    55         419         s:146          2356         s:189         4:520
    56         421         9:200         4927          8:663          4'530
    57         204         9:210         4946          8:680          2:561
    58         177         5:135          2341         5:172          2:338
    59         413         4:271         2014          4'510          4:472
    6o         320         9:151         4840          s:sss         3:669
    61          68         7:211         3685          7:264          1:493
    62         414         2:192          696          2:400          4'481
    63         140         9:162         4864          8:602           2:74
    64          30          4:8          1609           4:75          1:217
    6s         198         1:249           173         1:420          2:493
    66         196          s:66          2275          s:6o          2:484
    67          38          5:51         2263           5'35          1:272
    68                     1:318          280          1:534
                                                 REFERENCES ~ 165

I:Iadith  Mishkatal-  Mirqatal-      Number in    Mirqatal-     Ma;:ahir-e
Number                Mafatt/:1 [1]  Mirqat [n]  mafati/:1 [n]     ljaq
           Ma~abi/:1                                                2:537
    69         201        5:111          2306        5:134          2:538
    70         201        5:112          2308         5:135         1:123
    71          15        1:108                      1:199         4:603
    72         430        9:285            35        8:795         4'597
    73         429        9'279          5065        8:786          2:656
    74         222        5'274          5055        5=397          3:675
    75         321        7:217          2522        7:274         4:784
    76         451        10:41          3696        9:143         4'436
    77         409        9:121          5290        8:536         4'436
    78         409        9:132          4783        8:538         4'448
    79         410        9'131          4784        8:554         4'839
    8o         455        10:70          4804        9:188         4:6oo
    81         430        9:283          5328        8:791         4'941
    82         464       10:135          5061        9:288         4:385
    83         403         9:81          5405        8:470         4:626
    84         433        9:308          4692        8:829         4=834
    85         455        10:61          5108        9:184          3'43
    86         242        6:43           5325         6:23          4:821
    87         454        10:6o          2773        9:173          1:150
    88          18        1:138           5312       1:245         4:701
    89         442        9'375                       9:50          2:476
    90         195        5=44             68         5'23          4:518
    91         419        9:199          5194        8:661         4:804
    92         452        10:51          2247        9:158         2:268
    93         168       4:208           4925        4'405         4'704
    94         443        9'377          5300         9'53         4:826
    95         454        10:62          1909        9:174          2:268
    96         168       4:208            5198       4:405
    97         398         9'55           5314       8:428          4'353
    98         246        6:68           1910         6:66           3=79
    99         434        9'316          4646        8:843         4:633
   100         412        9:140          2827        8:567         4=460
   101         419        9'192           5118       8:651          4:510
   102         427        9:258          4825        8:753         4'572
   103         441        9:362          4915         9:30         4:687
   104          36        1:306          5021         1:513         1:261
   105         534        11:181          5176       10:215        5:484
   166          69        2:206           254        2:422          1:503
                                         5892
                                          719
166 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

I-:Iadith  Mishkiital-  Mirqat al-    Number in      Mirqatal-     Ma?iihir-e
Number                  Mafiiti~ [1]  Mirqiit (II)  mafiiti~ [II]      I,faq
            Ma~abi~                                                    1:395
   107                       2:89           531         2:231          1:160
   108           55         1:153          268          1:268         4:865
   109           20         10:88          5352         9:215          4:591
   110          458         9:277         5050          8:781         4=856
    111         429         10:82          5345         9:206          1:207
   112          457         1:232          156          1:392          3=134
    113          28         6:103         2912          6:123         4=690
   114          252         9=364         5180           9=34         4=672
   115          441         9:349          5160          9:10         4=766
   116          439         10:27         5270          9:121          1:259
   117          449         1:304          251           1:511        4:680
   118           36         9=356          5167          9:21         4=474
   119          440         9:154         4845          8:590          p26
   120          413         6:96          2897          6:113         4=460
   121          251         9=139         4824          8:566          4:517
   122          411         9:197         4922          8:659         4=594
   123          419         9:278         5052          8:784         4=541
   124          429         9:222         4963          8:698           3=52
   125          422         6:50          2787           6:35          1:213
   126          243         1:244          167          1:412          3=592
   127           30         7'114         3545           7:111        4=244
   128          308         8:325          489          8:265          1:99
   129          385          1:73                       1:144          4=581
   130           12        9:268             7          8:768         4=543
   131          428         9:226         5034          8:704          3=157
   132          423         6:118         4968          6:149         3=779
   133          255         7:327         2946          7=445          1:232
   134          338         1:264         3894          1:446         4:554
   135           32         9=239          198          8:723          4=535
   136          424         9:215         4989          8:686          3=43
   137          422         6:43          4956           6:23         4:612
   138          242         8:295         2773          8:810         4=571
   139          432         9:256         5083          8:750          3=147
   140          426         6:111         5018          6:138          1:108
   141          254         1:84          2934          1:161          1:735
   142           12          3=83                       3=196         4=374
   143          100         9=73            15          8:457         4:228
   144          401        8:306           1119         8:235
                382                       4676
                                          4458
                                                  REFERENCES ~ 167

I:Jadith  Mishkiital-  Mirqiital-    Number in     Mirqiital-    Ma:;:ahir-e
Number                 Mafiiti~ [I]  Mirqiit [n]  mafiiti~ [II]      lfaq
           Ma?iibi~
   145         442         9=368          5187         9:40         4=694
   146          139         4=5           5274        9:125          2:69
   147         258         6:138         2987         6:181          3=178
   148         323         7=231         3722         7=296          7:231
   149         361         8:144          4136        7:726          4:68
   150         441                        5178         9=33         4:689
    151        380         9=364         4421          8:211         4:211
    152         133        8:290          1523          4=5           2:25
    153        324         3=346          3731        7=303          3=692
   154         449         7=236          5262        9:116         4=762
    155        145         10:24         1664         4=152          2:117
   156         190         4=54           2187        4:688          2:438
    157         83                        888         2:609          1:596
   158          58           5:2          572         2:275          1:421
    159        148         2:319          1698        4=178          2:129
   160         292         2:115          5370        6:534          3=486
    161        340         4=69           3916        7=459          3=788
   162         403         6:355         4704         8:479          4=393
   163         414         7=335         4856         8:597         4=478
   164          155         9:86          1772        4:260          2:177
   165         221         9:158          2513        5:386          2:649
   166         357         4=119         4076         7:681          4=37
   167         167         5:268          1887        4=390          2:258
   168         524         8:116          5858        10:134        5=404
   169         332         4=199          3821        7=385          3=741
   170         441         11:127         5174         9:28         4:686
    171        433         7:288          5105        8:826          4:623
    172        282         9=360         3262         6:405          3=386
    173        423         9:305         4970         8:705         4=544
    174        413         6:274         4847          8:591        4=475
    175        440         9:227          5170         9:23         4:682
   176         424         9:155         4991         8:725          4=556
    177        419         9=357         4923         8:659          4:517
   178         412         9=240          5031        8:764         4=461
    179        194         9:197          2232          5=13         2:471
   180          511     9=140/265         5738        9=732          5=307
    181         150         5=38          1725        4:208          2:145
   182         434         11:43          5119        8:843          4=633
                            4=87
                           9=317
168 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

I:Iadith  Mishkatal-  Mirqiital-    Number in     Mirqiital-    Ma:;iihir-e
Number                Mafiiti~ [1]  Mirqiit [n]  mafiiti~ [II]      lfaq
           Ma~iibi~                                                3:205
   183         261        6:157         3025         6:213         1:240
   184          33        1:275          209         1:463          2:473
   185         195         5:40         2238          5'17          3=157
   186         255        6:119         2947         6:149          3=551
   187         305         7=94         3520          7:8o         4'471
   188         413        9'149         4837         8:581         4:607
   189         431        9:288         5068         8:799          3=678
   190         322        7:220         3701         7'279         4=842
   191         455        10:72          5331        9=191          4'177
   192         375        8:255         4347         8:155         2:656
   193         222        5'274          2523        5=397          3'729
   194         329        7:273         9797         7:362         1:200
   195          27        1:221          145         1:375          3'551
   196         305        7=94          3520          7:80          2:152
   197         151        4=96           1738        4:222          3'154
   198         299         7:51         3452          7'13         1:494
   199          68        2:192          697         2:401         4=474
   200         413        9:155         4846         8:590          1:615
   201          86        2:340          921          3:10          1:233
   202          32        1:267          200         1:450         3:205
   203         261        6:157         3024         6:213          4'551
   204         424        9:235         4984         8:717         4=634
   205         434        9:318          5121        8:845         1:248
   206          34        1:286          223         1:481         4=256
   207          35        1:299          242         1:503         3:204
   208         261        6:156         2023         6:212          1:217
   209          30        1:250          176         1:422          1:124
   210          15        1:109           36         1:201          1:256
   211          35        1:299          242         1:503         1:224
   212          31        1:257          189         1:433          1:197
   213          27        1:215          140         1:365          4454
   214         411        9:135         4812         8:559          1:122
   215          14        1:107           30         1:197          3=129
   216         251        6:98          2904         6:116          1:247
   217          34        1:285          220         1=479         1:898
   218         121       3=248          1379         3=470         2:330
   219                   4'259          1999         4=491          1:232
   220        q6           265           198         1:446
                32
                                                   REFERENCES ~ 169

J:Iadlth  Mishkiital-  Mirqiit al-   Number in      Mirqiital-    Ma:;ahir-e
Number                 Mafiiti~ [1]  Mirqiit [II]  mafiiti~ [II]      Ifaq
           Ma~iibi~                                                   1:475
   221          65         2:166          664          2:359          3:737
   222         331         7:283          3813         7:377          4:177
   223         375         8:254         4346          8:154         1:248
   224          34         1:286          225          1:482          1:249
   225          34         1:287          227          1:483         4:314
   226         393          9:15         4595          8:362         2:284
   227         171         4:223         1943          4:431         4:645
   228         436         9:328          5137         8:860          2:337
   229         177         4:271         2013          4:509          3:658
   230         318         7:198         3661          ?:244          3:133
   231         252         6:102         2910          6:122          2:314
   232         175         4:257         1992          4:487          3:162
   233         256         6:122         2958          6:156         4:323
   234         394         9:24          4609          8:377         3708
   235         327         7:255         3765          7:334          2:295
   236         173         4:231         1958         4:444           2:295
   237         173         4:231         1958         4:444          1:498
   238          68        2:200           707          2:412         3:693
   239         324         7:237         3733          7:305         3:495
   240         296          7:31         3420          6:593         4:120
   241         368         8:201         4243           8:68          1:455
   242          62         2:145          630          2:324          1:236
   243          33         1:272          204          1:457         3:734
   244         330         7:279         3808          7:372         4:225
   245         382         8:303         4450          8:230         2:646
   246         221         5:265         2507          5:381          3:765
   247         336         7:316         3828          7:428          1:131
   248          16         1:117           45          1:213          5:27
   249         469        10:164         5440          9:334          1:177
   250          22         J:l81          !10          1:312          1:333
   251         46           2:17          401          2:113          4:119
   252         368         8:200         4240           8:67         4:541
   253         422         9:223         4965          8:699         2:282
   254         171         4:221          1937         4:427          1:334
   255         46           2:19          406          2:!16          6:o8
   256         431         9:289         5071          8:801          4:81
   257         363         8:162         4162                        4:207
   258         379         8:284         4410            8:7
                                                       8:201
170 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

I:Iadith Mishkatal-  Mirqatal-    Number in     Mirqatal-    Ma;;ahir-e
Number Ma~abi~       Mafati~ [I]  Mirqat [II]  mafati~ [II]      lfaq

259  68              2:198        704          2:410                 1:497

260  339             7:331        3903         7:452                 3:782

261  137             3:372        1572         4:46                  2:52

     PART 2: SOME UNSEEN EVENTS WHICH THE MESSENGER iQ1. PROPHESIED

1    583             11:465       6285         10:653                5:912
                     1:230         154         1:390                 1:206
2    28

3    327             7:256        3767          335                  3:709
                     6:65         2818         6:60                  3:74
4    245             1:247        170          1:417                 1:214
                     1:302        248          1:508                 1:258
5    30

6    36

7    462             10:121       5390         9:267                 4:912
                     10:120       5389         9:266                 4:911
8    462             10:167       5445         9:338                  5:30
                      1:316       276          1:531                 1:271
9    469

10   38

11   455             10:72        5330         9'191                 4:841
                     10:94        5362         9:225                 4:874
12   458

13   469             10:95        5365         9:227                 4:875

14   459             10:97        5367            9:231              4:877
                     10:98        5369            9:233              4:879
15   459             9:130        4799            8:550              4:445
                      6:34        2761             6:11               3'33
16   410              3:85        1124         3:199-200             1:738
                     11:464       6284           10:653              5:911
17   241             11:469       6289           10:66o              5:916
                      6:49        2784             6:33               3:50
18   100

19   583

20   584

21   243

22   306             7:95         3524         7:83                  3:552
                                                                     1:238
23   33              1:273        206          1:460                 1:272
                                                                     2:448
24   38              1:317        279          1:534

25   191             5:12         2207         4:706

          PART 3: STORIES & ACCOUNTS (40 NARRATIONS)

1    11               1:49          2          1:108                 1:90
                      2:15        298          2:109                 1:330
2    46              2:117        576          2:278                 1:423
                     2:323        796          2:616                 1:559
3    58               3:67        1085         3'169                 1:719
                     4:207        1907         4:404                 2:267
4    84

5    97

6    168

7    169             4:213        1919         4'413                 2:274
                      4:4         1603         4:69                  2:86
8    139
                                                 REFERENCES ~ 171

I:Iadlth  Mishkatal-  Mirqatal-      Number in    Mirqatal-     Ma:;:ahir-e
Number                Mafati/:1 [1]  Mirqat [n]  mafati/:1 [n]     lfaq
           Ma~abi/:1
     9         181        4=313          2082        4=578          2:369
    10         400         9:71          4669        8:453         4=370
    11         453        10:59          5308        9:170          4:819
    12         404         9=87          4706        8:479         4=394
    13         363        8:160          4159                       4:80
    14         365        8:181          4203          8:s          4:103
    15         339        7=335           3915        8:38          3=787
    16         413        9=149          4838        7=458          4=471
    17         390        8:368          4567        8:582         4:285
    18         299         7:50          3450        8:332          3:513
    19         251        6:99           2906         7:11          3=130
    20         269       6:200            3116       6:118          3:271
    21         508        7=335           5719       6:284          5:289
    22         340        7=336          3918        9:707         3=789
    23         416        9:173          4886        7=460         4=494
    24         445        9=391          5226        8:620         4=727
    25          52         2:67           492         9=76          1:376
    26          69        2:204           716        2:196          1:501
    27         200        5:108           2301       2:419          2:534
    28         252        6:102          2991        5:128          3=134
    29        1414        9=344          4866        6:123         4=482
    30         412        9=369          4829        8:602         4:463
    31        7438        9=344           5152       8:571         4:666
    32         442        9=369           5188       8:885         4=695
    33         291        9=347           3353        9=42          3=451
    34         453        10:53          5302        6:520         4:809
    35         307        7:110          3542        9:161          3=588
    36          36        1:307           257        7:106          1:262
    37         486       10:271           5561       1:516          5:147
    38          27        1:219           145        9:505         1:200
    39          29        1:239           165        1:372          1:212
   40           13         1:98                      1:406          1:116
                                           24        1:182
BIBLIOGRAPHY

'Ali, 'Abdullah Yusuf. 1he Holy Quran: English Translation of the Meanings and
      Commentary. Revised and Edited by the Presidency oflslamic Researches,
      Ifta, Call and Guidance. Al-Madinah al-Munawwarah, Saudi Arabia.

'Asqalanl, Ai).mad ibn l:fajar. Fatb al-Biiri bi sharb ~abib al-Bukhari. Riyadh,
      Saudi Arabia: Bayt al-Afkar al-Duwaliyya.

al-Barnl, Mui).ammad 'Ashiq Ilahl (al-Bulandshehrl). Zad al-talibin with com-
      mentary Mazad al-riighibin by author and extended i).ad!th references by
      Khwaja Mui).ammad Khalid and Jam!l Ai).mad Ma~ahirl. Madina, Saudi
      Arabia: Matabi' al-Rashid. 1414l1993. Second Edition.

Dehlawi, Nawab Mui).ammad Qutb al-Dln. Ma~iihir-e lfaq. Karachi, Pakistan:
      Dar al-Isha'at.

al-l:fanbali, Ibn Rajah. fiimi' al-'ulum wa 'l-bikam fi sharb khamsina badith

      min jawami' al-kalim. Dar al-Furqan, Amman Jordan. 14nl1990. First
      Edition.
Ibn 'Abid!n, Mui).ammad Amin. Radd al-mubtiir 'ala '1-Durr al-mukhtar. Beirut,
      Lebanon: Dar Ii).ya' al-Turath al-'Arabi.
Ibn 'Allan, Mui).ammad al-Siddlql al-Makki al-Shafi'I. Dalil al-fiilibin li
      turuq Riyacj. al-?iilibin. Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Ma'rifa. 1414l1994. First
      Edition.
Lane, E. W Arabic-English Lexicon. Cambridge, England: Islamic Text Society.
       1984.
Man~urpurl, Mui).ammad Salman. Allah se sharam kijye. Kanpur, India: Madani
      Kutub Khana. 2003. Third Edition.
Nu'manl, Mui).ammad Man~ur. Ma'arif al-badith. Lahore, Pakistan: 'Umar
      Faruq Academy.
al-Patnl, Mui).ammad Tahir al-Gujratl al-Hindl. Majmac bibiir al-anwiir.
      Hyderabad Daccan, India. Matba' al-'Uthmaniyya.
al-Qarl, Mulla 'Ali. Mirqiit al-mafiitib sharb Mishkat al-Ma?iibib. [Edition 1]
      Multan, Pakistan: Maktaba Imdadiyya. [Edition n] Beirut, Lebanon: Dar
      al-Fikr. This edition has been used for the commentary in Provisions for
       the Seekers.

                                                                                                     173
174 P:::> PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

Robson, James. Mishkiit al-Ma$iibi/:t: English Translation with explanatory notes.
      Lahore, Pakistan: SH. Muhammad Ashraf Co.

al-Tabrizi, Wali al-Din. Mishkiit al-Ma$iibi/:t. Karachi, Pakistan: Qadimi Kutub
      Khan a.

al-Tirmidhi, Abu 'Isa Mul).ammad ibn 'Isa. Al-Shamii'il al-Mu/:tammadiyya with
      commentary Kha$ii'il al-Nabawi ~by Zakariyya Kandhlawi, translated
      by Muhammad bin Abdurrahman Ibrahim. Karachi, Pakistan: Idaratul
      Quran wal Uloomil Islamiyah. 1993. Second Edition.

'Uthmani, Mul).ammad Taqi. Takmila Fat/:t al-Mulhim hi shar/:t $a/:ti/:t Muslim.
      Deoband, India: Al-Maktaba al-Ashrafiyya.
BIOGRAPHIES

ABU MUI;IAMMAD AL-BAGHAWI (AUTHOR OF MA$ABiij AL-SUNNA)

Abu MuiJammad l:fusayn ibn Mas'ud ibn MuiJammad al-Farra al-Baghawi
was born in 435/1043. He was a Shafi'i scholar from the village of Bugh or
Bughshur, which was near modern-day Herat, Afghanistan. The attribute of
al-Farra was ascribed to him from his father, who was a furrier by trade. He
was a favored student of Qac,H l:fusayn ibn MuiJammad al-Marwa al-Rudi (d.
462/1069) and studied under many other prominent scholars, including Abu
'1-l:fasan Dawudi (d. 465 AH) and 'Abd al-RaiJman ibn MuiJammad Ya'qub
ibn AIJmad al-Sayrafi. Baghawi was an ascetic, exegete, IJadith scholar, and
a Shafi'i jurist and was also well known for his piety and spirituality. He was
known to eat bread without any curry, a practice he could not continue in his
old age, when he began to take with it some olive oil, nonetheless indicative
of the simplicity in his life. He died at the age of 81 in 516/1122 in Marw, and
was buried beside his teacher Qac;li l:fusayn al-Marwazi in Herat.

    Among his literary accomplishments are the Shar~ al-Sunna (The
explication of the Sunna), regarding which he saw a dream in which the
Messenger of Allah ~ said to him, "May Allah enliven you just as you have
enlivened my Sunna:' He also wrote Al-Mu)am (The lexicon), Lubab al-ta'-

wilfi macalim al- Tanzil (The quintessence of interpretation: on features of

the Revelation), a commentary of the Qur'an, and Ma~abi~ al-Sunna (The
lamps of the Sunna), which was held in high regard by his contemporaries,
and thus, within a short span of time, a number of works were produced
upon it as additional commentaries.

KHATIB TABRIZI (AUTHOR OF MISHKAT AL-MA$ABiij)

Wall al-Din MuiJammad ibn 'Abdillah al-Khatib al-'Amuri al-Tabrizi (d.
749/1348) was one of the most eminent IJadith scholars of his time and was
well versed in the intricacies of the Arabic language, including the art of
rhetoric. He was well known for his high level of good character and social
etiquette and was the author of Mishkat al-Ma~abi~ (The niche ofthe lamps)
which is considered his magnum corpus, written on Baghawi's Ma~abi~

                                                                                                    175
176 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

al-Sunna. Tabri:zi: was the student of l,ladi:th scholar Ti:bi:, who encouraged
him to work on Ma~iibl~ al-Sunna, and in turn wrote a commentary on
the Mishkiit al-Ma~iibl~ once it was written. Many students benefited from
Tabri:zi:, among them Mubarak Shah Sad!. It is unfortunate that more is
not known about Tabri:zi:'s life. He completed the Mishkiit al-Ma~iibl~ in
Rama<;lan 737 and died shortly after this year. Some have reported that he
died in 748 AH and others say 740 AH.

MULL..~. cALl AL-QARI (AUTHOR OF MIRQAT AL-MAFATiij)

'All ibn Sultan Mul,lammad al-Qari: (d. 1014/I6os), more popularly known
as Mulla 'All al-Qari:, was an ascetic, l,ladi:th scholar, jurist, theologian, and
authored what has been heralded as the most comprehensive Arabic com-
mentary on the Mishkiit al-Ma~iibl~, titled Mirqiit al-mafiitl~ (The place of
ascent to the keys). He was born in Herat, Afghanistan, where he received
his primary years of Islamic education. Thereafter, he traveled to Makka,
where he studied under numerous scholars, including Shaykh Al,lmad
ibn I:Iajar al-Haytami: al-Makki: and Qutb al-Di:n al-I:Ianafi. He was called
al-Qiirl, "The Reciter:' because of his mastery of the sciences of Qur'anic
recitation. Mulla cAll al-Qari: remained in Makka, where he taught until his
death in 1014/I6o6. His written works include a two-volume commentary
on Qa<;li: 'Iya<;l's Al-Shifii' (The cure), a two-volume commentary on Imam
Ghazali:'s abridgment of the I~yii' 'ulum al-dln (The revival of the religious
sciences) entitled 'Ayn al-'ilm wa zayn al-~ilm (The spring of knowledge
and the adornment of understanding), a book of prophetic invocations,
Al-Ifizb al-a':;;am (The supreme daily dhikr), and a commentary on Imam
Abii I:Iani:fa's Al-Fiqh al-akbar (The great understanding).

'ASHIQ ILAHI AL-BULANDSHEHRI (AUTHOR OF ZAD AL-TALIBiN)

A prolific writer and eminent scholar of the Indian Subcontinent, Shaykh
'Ashiq Ilahi: al-Bulandshehri: (or al-Barnl) was born in 1343 AH in Buland-
shehr of Uttar Pradesh. After attaining his primary education at Madrasa
Imdadiyya Moradabad and Jami' Masjid Aligarh, he traveled to Ma~ahir
cUliim Saharanpur in pursuit of higher knowledge. After completing his
studies, he taught various subjects at Ferozpur Jhirka, I:Iayat al-Uliim
Moradabad, and at different madrasas throughout Calcutta. He later taught
                                                                                     BIOGRAPHIES ~ 177

at Dar al-'Ulum Karachi for several years at the request ofMufti Mul).ammad
Shafi', where he assumed responsibility of the fatwa department and taught
students l).adith and tafslr. The Shaykh later migrated to Madina, where he
spent the last 25 years of his life. He was a disciple of the l).adith scholar
Shaykh Mul).ammad Zakariyya Kandhlawi. Dozens of his books have been
well received in many countries. To~fa-e khawatln (Gift for women), Marne
ke bad kya hoga? (What is going to happen after death?), Islam! adab (Islamic
conduct), J:Iuquq al-walidayn (Rights of parents), and Anwar al-bayan
(Illuminating discourses on the Holy Qur'an), a voluminous commentary
of the Qur'an, are among the well-known books he authored. In the field of
l).adith, he authored Zad al-talibln (Provisions for the seekers) and Al-Pawa'id

al-saniyya fi shar~ al-Arbacln al-Nawawiyya (The lofty beneficial points in

the explanation ofNawawi's Forty l).adiths). As for jurisprudence, he is the

author ofAl- Tas~ll al-tjarurlfi masa'il al-Qudurl (The necessary facilitation

of the laws of Quduri), as well as dozens of reformative booklets and articles.
He passed away in the illuminated city of Madina at the age of 8o and was
buried there in the Baqi' graveyard, as had been his desire.

ABDUR-RAHMAN IBN YUSUF (TRANSLATOR)

Mufti Abdur-Rahman ibn Yusuf, born and raised in London, studied in
England, India, South Africa, and Syria. After memorizing the Holy Qur'an,
he continued his education, earning a BA in Islamic Studies from the Uni-
versity ofJohannesburg, and graduated from Darul Uloom in Bury, England,
with a degree and formal authorization in the Islamic Sciences, and special-
ized in legal judgment (ijta) at Ma~ahir 'Ulum Saharanpur, India. This was
followed by a Masters and PhD in Islamic Studies from SOAS (University
of London). To date, he has written the well-received Fiqh al-Imam, a guide
to the I:Ianafi position on disputed matters of prayer, and is the translator of
I:Iasan Ba~ri's Prayers for Forgiveness, Abu I:Ianifa's Al-Fiqh al-Akbar, ~alat
& Salam: In Praise ofAllah's Most Beloved, co-authored Reflections ofPearls,
and has edited Imam Ghazali's Beginning of Guidance (Bidayat al-Hidaya)
and Shaykh 'Abdullah Gangohi's commentary Ikmal al-Shiyam on Ibn
'Ata'illah al-Iskandari's l:fikam. Currently serving as an imam and teacher at
a London mosque, he continues to write, translate, and hold regular online
classes through ZamZam Academy (www.zamzamacademy.com).
INDEX

A                                             pleasure of 45, 46, 87, 133, 152
                                              wrath of 55, 104
'ABDULLAH IBN 'AMR 155 ,132 c~             ANAS 157 ,147-146 ,145 ,138 ~
                                           angels 33, 42, 66-67, 68, 104, 105,
ablution. See ww;iu'
                                                  130-132, 137
abstinence. See zuhd                       anger 57, 75, 81, 91, 147, 151, 153
                                           animals
ABU BAKR 158 ,94 .t_.,
                                              riding 78, 145
ABU DHARR 150 ,133 ~                          treatment of 43, 74, 78, So, 154
ABU HURAYRA 151 ,144 ,142 ,84 ~            arguing 86, 99
ABU QATADA 149 ,136 ~                      arrogance 84,85,98,99
accusations 39-40
actions 24-26, 28, 37, 38, 39, 42, 46,     B

      48, so, s6, 59, 6o, 71, Ioo-1o1,     backbiting. See gh!ba
       106, 140, 142, 152
admonishing others 67, 73-74, 101,         battle 41, 44, 79, 98, 140
       142,147                             beard 75,88,103,121
adultery 29                                beating 77, 124-125, 152, 156
advice 26, 53, 63, 92, 101                 beauty 53, 56, 57, 67, 85
Af.IMAD IBN f.IANBAL 24, 25, 114           believers, characteristics of 29, 30,
'A'ISHA 156 ,143 ,136 ,24 ~
Al-bamdu li 'Lliih 31, 49                         35, 39, 40, 47, 54, ss, 61, 65, 66,
alcohol 29, 36, 101                               67, 82,107
'ALI IBN ABI TALIB ,141 ,140 ,35 ~         bells 31, 68
       158 ,157                            Bismi 'Lliih 31, 139
                                           brotherhood 40, s6, 67-68, 79, 92,
ALLAH MOST HIGH                                   119-120, 138, 151
                                           BUKHARI (IMAM) 25, 159
    bounty from 68, 107                    burying daughters 57, 91
    calling on 27, 153                     business 36-37, 6o, 74, 97
    fear of 51, 61, 70, 74, 96, 125, 150,
                                           c
       158
    guidance from 48, 118-119, 120,        call to prayer 72, 98
                                           calmness 28, 42
       127
    love from 38, 42, s8, 70, 72-73
    mercy of 73-74, 90, 120
    obedience to 34, 38, 51, s8, 6o, 66,

       101, 114, 121, 153

                                           179
180 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

camels 76-77, 78, 124-125, 140, 142,      one's condition at 6o, 62
      145                                 predetermination of 54, 55, 81,

captives, treatment of 71                    108, 112
celibacy 50, 157                          remembrance of 29
character 29, 38, 50, 70, 81, 86, 87,  debt
                                          delayed payment 42, 96
      88, 92, 121                         denial of 57
charity. See ?adaqa                       forgiveness of 62, 149
cheating 79, 156                          repayment 102, 142
                                       deceit 29, 35, 37, 47, 89, 91, 92, 97,
children 53. 59· 67, n 108, 131-132
                                             103
circumcision 36                        Desert Arabs 86-87, 108, 132, 142,
cleanliness. See na;;:iifa
clothing. See dress                          147
companionship 47, 70, 133-134          desires 29, 30, 34, 54, 63, 66, 76, 96,
Companions (?ababa) 97. 103, 115,
                                             97. 110, 125
      116, 122, 131-132, 136           destiny. See qadr
compassion 87, 140                     dhikr (remembrance) 25, 48, 49, 58,
confidence 28, 91
consensus. See ijmii'                        63, So, 111, 147, 148, 150
contentment 43, 47, 54, 62, 70, 82     dogs 66-6h68,77
corruption 56, 59, 74, 93, 99, 108,    donkeys 52, 145, 159
                                       doubt 54,70
      116, 117, 118-119, 126, 159      dreams 42,102-103
cowardice 53, 108, 122                 dress 88, 98, 110-111. See
cursing 74, 76, 82, 97, 141
                                             also modesty (baya')
D                                      drinking 26, 40, 110
                                       duff 36
dajjiil 115                            du'ii' (supplication)
da'wa So, 95, 119
Day of Judgment                           for others 55, So, 100
                                          obligation of 27, 85
   accounting on 32, 46, 48, 52, 156      sincerity in 106
   beliefin 131-132                       virtue of 45, 48, 49, 79, 83, 155
   punishment on 27, 30, 36-37, 66,
                                       E
      91, 92, 98, 99. 102
   reward on 45, 49, 96                eating
   signs of 131-132                       beneficial 26, 31, 157
death                                     manners relating to 104, 108-109,
   deeds recovered after 59, 63-64,          110, 139
                                          sinful 76, 82, 116
      76
   dislike of 53, 122                  emigration 24, 39
   gift for believer 47
                                        INDEX ~ 181

entertainment 35, 68, 119                  of others 50
estate 74                                  seeking 45, 66, 91, 137
etiquette 56, 78, 109, 138, 147         fornication 32, 36, 95-96
evil, forbidding 48, 71, 82, 87, 119,   fortune-tellers 99-100
                                        Friday prayers 41, 97
      123, 151                          friendliness 33-34, 83
                                        friendship 70-71, 78, 120
F
                                        G
faith. See !man
                                        gaze, lowering 33
falsehood 54, 57, 70, So, 92, 97, 103,  gentleness 86
      115, 119, 158                     AL-GHAZALI, ABU I:IAMID 71, 75, 86

false claims 103                        ghlba (backbiting) 32, 58, 86, 97,
false evidence 97, 115
family 46, 64, 67, 123                        140, 151
                                        good, enjoining 48, 82, 85, 100, 119,
   rights of 41, 45, 57-58
                                              123, 151
faqlh (jurist) 44-45, 90-91, 93         good deeds 56, 59, 64, 70, 107, 120
fara'icj (obligatory acts) 41-42, 43,   gossip 48, 57-58, 78

      101,126                           gratitude. See shukr
fasting 24-25, 157
                                        graves 61,64,72,78,118
   deficient 46, 87, 97                 greed 44, 47, 59, 63, 64, 104
   obligation of 130                    guests 70, 105
   required knowledge 42, 6o
   reward for 31, 101, 102, 103, 137    H

fatawa 42, 74, 93-94                    l}adath (minor ritual impurity) 31

fathers 43, 45, 53, 58, 67              l_ladith
faults, concealing 91-92, 150              false 97-98, 114-115
feeding others 43, 70-71, 105, 109,        knowledge of 42, 95

       135                                scholars 24, 36, 37, 61, 73, n 114,

fitna 32-33,53,55,124-125,143                  132, 148
fitra 38                                   teaching 69, 99
                                        hair 71, 72, 106, 110, 111, 125
flutes 31, 35
                                        l}aram (unlawful) acts 24, 29, 32, 36,
Followers (tabi'ln) 75, 115, 122
Followers of the Followers (atba'              38, 65-66, 68, 95-96, 100-101,
                                               119, 122, 124
      al-tabi'ln) 115                   hardship 30, 52, 53, 61, 63, 153
                                        I:IASAN AL- BA~RI 25, 75, 90, 99
food                                    haste 28, So, 88
    hoarding 64                         hatred 71, 83
    unlawful 65-66, 116

footwear 108-109, 110-111
forgiveness

    of Allah 32, 56, 62, 103-104, 149
1S2 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

   for the sake of Allah ss, 96, 120    imiims 10S, 119, 123, 124, 126, 147
health 26, 55, 59, S1, 112, 147         imiin (faith)
hearts
                                           aspects of 26, 2S, 30-31, 71, 105
    conviction in 131-132, 159             branches of 2S
   fear in 74, 15S                         definition 31, 131-132
   hardness S7, 120, 127, 150              degrees 57, 70, 96, 100-101
   illnesses 35, 3S, 61                    loss of 49-50, 121
   intention in s6, 9S, 100-101, 142       reward for 103-104, 107, 125
    purification of 4S, 49, 54, 73      innovation 24, 67, 70, 93, 94-95, 117,
   winning 51, 99
heedlessness 43, 47, 65, S7, 107              119, ISS
Hellfire 61, 63, 71                     intelligence 34, so, 65
    actions punished in 32, 57, 64-65,  intention 24-26, 41, 46, 55, 59, 62,

       67, 97, 99, 124-125                    94-95, 97, 99, 100, 117, 159
   fear of 73, So                       intercession 32, 69
   people saved from 93, 9S, 152        interest 57, 115-116
home 140                                intoxicants 36. See also alcohol
humility S3, S4, 131, 145               invitations 70, 100
humor 145                               isliim (submission) 3S, 130-132
hunger 40,43,46,70,75,S2
hunting 6S, So, S7                      J
husbands 43, 46-47, 79, S1, S3,
                                        JABIR 151 ,137 ~
       92-93                            janiiba (major ritual impurity) 31
hypocrisy. See nifiiq                   Jews 127, 135
                                        JIBRIL 130-132, 149, 151
I                                       jihiid

IBN 'ABBAS, 'ABDULLAH 153 ,5S ,35 ~        avoiding 53, 9S
IBN 'ABIDIN 77, 95                         equipping others SS, 102
IBN J:IAJAR AL-'ASQALANI 36, 77, 92        forms of 39, 41, So
IBN MAS'UD, 'ABDULLAH ,32 ,2S ~            greater 39, 44, S7
                                           physical 96, 107, 114, 123, 149
       152 ,140 ,9S ,35                 judges 75-76, 104, 10S, 126
IBN 'UMAR, 'ABDULLAH 75 ,35 ,29 }&.
'ld 36                                  K
idolatry 29, S4
ignorance 52, sS, 6o, 76, S7, 93, 117,  Ka'ba 104, 105
                                        killing 3S, 44, S9, 117, 142
       119, 123, 125-126, 147           kindness 3S, 71, So
i/:tsiin (perfection) 2S, 131-132, 153  kinship 65, 67-6S, S3, 135
ijmii' (consensus) 52, 94               knowledge ('ilm)
illness 59, S1, 97, 101, 112
                                           loss of 117, 125-126
                                        INDEX <=:A 183

   preservation 116-117                    etiquette in 104, 110-111, 134, 138,
   seeking 34, 41-42, 44-45, 46,              147

      58-59,96,99,126,138                  status of 47
   spreading 58-59, 92, 126, 155           women in 143
   useless 48, 52, 59
   withholding 92, 159                  mercy 68, 82, 87, 157. See also Allah,

kufr (unbelief) 57, 61. See                   mercy of
      also unbelievers                  Messenger of Allah ~

L                                          allegiance to 148
                                           attributing false statements to
laborers 73
laughter 139, 150                             97-98, 114-115
                                           characteristics of 67, 103, 135, 145
Lii iliiha illa 'Lliih 49, 93, 141-142     companionship with in Hereafter

leadership 41, 46-47, 107-108, 119            133
liars 62, 64, 83, 86, 92-93, 97-98,        love for 67, 90, 123
                                           obedience to 27, 66, 67, 101
      114-115, 122, 135, 156               sincerity to 26
livelihood 34, 43, 54, 55, 122, 138        sunna of 89, 93, 121, 133, 157,
love 43
                                              158-159
   between people 27, 35, 70, 72, 120,  miserliness 34, 53, 108
      146                               moderation 33-34, 53-54

   for the sake of Allah 58, 96, 120    modesty (bayii') 28-29, 107, 110, 125

lower self. See nafs                       in dress 33,121,124-125

lust 35, 82, 143                        mosques. See masjids

M                                       mothers 29,57-58,89,132,144,145
                                        mourning 84, 89
Madina Munawwaa 132, 135, 143, 148      moustache 75

madrasas 59, 95, 124                    muftis 74, 93, 126
mabram (unmarriageable kin) 79
                                        murder 28,29,89,117
Makka 24,25,104,116,132,148             Miisa 84 $liJI

makruh (disliked) acts 36, 68, 78,      music 35-36. See also bells

      101, 123                          muslim, characteristics of 39, 46, 50

mandub (recommended) acts 95,           mustababb (recommended) acts m

      101, 106, 109, 110, 152           N
markets 47
marriage 6o, 92-93, 157                 nafs (lower self) 34-35, 54, 66, 81,
martyrs 27, 37, 62, 93, 106, 149
                                              97,134
masjids (mosques) 95, 118-119, 123
                                        najiisa (impurity) 31, 147
   constructing 59, 6o, 89-90, 124,     al-na~lba 26-27. See also sincerity
      148
                                        NAWAWi (IMAM) 40, 63, 73, 103, 109,
184 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

      114, 142                           prayer. See ~aliit
na?-iifa (cleanliness) 31, 32, 106, m    pride 31, 84-85, 98, 99
neighbors 65, 82, 105, 109               promises 35, 37, 8o
nifiiq (hypocrisy) 35, 37, 58, 70, 86,   property 68, 71, 102, 146
                                         Prophets 27, 33, 37, 45, 69, 131
      90, 97> 98                         prostration 29, 77, 134
Night of Qadr 103                        puberty 77
niyya. See intention                     purity (tahiira) 30-31
nobility 29, so, 56, 69, 110-m, 134
                                         Q
0
                                         qadr (destiny) 112, 131, 153-154
oaths 36, 38, 39-40, 97, 105, 115        AL-QARI, 'ALI 33, 36, 88, 95, 125
old age 63, 72, 81, 82                   questioning 34, 57-58, 6o, 131-132
onions 104                               Qur'an
oppression (?-ulm) 30, 42, 44, 79,
                                            belief in 131
      124-125                               intercession of 32
orphans 71, 135                             memorizing 76-77
ostentation 25, 52, 55, s6, 59, 86, 87,     preservation 59, 114
                                            recitation 25, 26, 48, 72, 118-119,
      127, 133, 135
                                               126, 147, 149, 150
p                                           sincerity toward 26
                                            teaching 42, 126
Paradise                                    witness of 32
   desire for 73                         QURAYSH 101
   entering 32, 37, 49, 57, 63, 64-65
   fragrance of 125-126                  R
   reward in 89-90, 137
                                         race 56
parents 38, 45, 51, 53, 57-58, 145       Rama<;lan 101, 103-104, 130
patience 28, 31, 66, 121                 rape 28
peace 135, 140, 146                      reconciliation 83
pictures 66-67                           religion
piety. See taqwii
pilgrimage (~ajj) 25, so, 88, 107,          preservation 114, 116-117, 121
                                            revival of 96
      130-131                               understanding of 90-91
poetry 52, 127                           remembrance. See dhikr
polytheists 75, 8o                       repentance 32, 33, 45, 67, 70, 97
poverty 61, 81, 96                       restraint 28, so, 81, 91
                                         resurrection 6o, 62, 87, 102
   fear of 53, 59                        reviling others 76, 97
   spiritual 57, 61, 82
power 81, 104, 152, 153
praise 25, 83, 91, 127
                                        INDEX ~ 185

righteousness 30, 36, 38, 56, 58, 62,         159-160. See also unbelievers
      73,106,109                        shukr (gratitude) 26, 35, 49, 85
                                        shyness 28-29
righteous people 51, 61, 120            sick, visiting 75, 111-113
   companionship with 27, 47, 62,       silence 47, 86, 105, 150
      88                                sincerity 24, 26, 53> 55, 56, 106, 114,

rightfully guided Caliphs 69, 94,             120,146
      158                               singing 35-36, 127
                                        sins
right side 108, 110-111, 139
rulers 44, 87, 101, 158                    avoidance of 39, 6o
                                           definition 38
s                                          effects of 55
                                           major 31, 38, 62
sacrifice 123, 144                         minor 31,62
~adaqa 30, 43, 44, 55, 59, So, 87, 91,     purification from 65
                                           regretting 140
      105, 138                             removal of 33, 90, 103-104, 133
saints, false 93, 98                    slander 58, 97, 140, 151
salam 31, 56, 72, 90, 135, 137          slaves 75, 81, 131-132, 152, 156, 158
                                        sleeping 26, 40, 77, 78, 152, 157
~alat (prayer) 31, 74, n 78, 99-100,
                                        socialization 34, 35, 47, so, n 87
      134-135
   concentration in 146                 solitude 47
   congregational 72, 106               speech 47, 51, 52, 95, 100-101, 105,
   establishing 130
   intention in 25, 87                        122, 146
   obligatory 97                        spending 24, 33-34, 47, 48, 51
   recommended 111                      status 27, 41, 55, 69, 84, 90, 122, 149,
   tahajjud (night prayers) 46,
                                              157
      103-104,106,135,157               students 58, 96, 97, 155
   tarawib 104                          SUFYAN AL-THAWRi 61, 124
~alawat (salutations) 48, 90            SULAYMAN 144 ~\
Satan 35, 54, 102-103, 110              supplication. See du'a'
   fighting against 44-45, 139, 150
   tools of 28, 31, 32-33, 47, 68       T
scholars 63, 118-119, 126
   sincerity to 26                      tajwid 126. See also Qur'an, recita-
seeing 84                                      tion
SHAFI'i (IMAM) 88, 94
shaking hands 95                        takbir 134
shame 91, 110                           tale bearing 58, 62, 64-65, 86
Shari'a 52, 53, 58, 95, 104             talk, idle 48, 57-58
shirk (empartnering) 30, 52, 87, 105,   taqwa (piety) so, s6, 57, 69, 87, 121, 125
186 ~ PROVISIONS FOR THE SEEKERS

tawaf (circumambulation) 104             warriors 39, 41, 44, 96, 102
tayammum (dry ablution) 110              wealth

teaching 25, 42, 58-59, 69, 114, 124,       benefits 51, 61, So, 124
       126, 131, 147> 155, 159              love of 63
                                             spiritual 82
TIBI ('ALLAMA) 49, 75, 79, So, 84,           squandering 48, 57, 64, 76, 102
       88,91,96,124,136                     temptation of 55, 74
                                            unlawful 43, 57, 65-66, 100, 122
tongue 39,48,86,90,91-92,95,122,            usurpation of 28, 42, 68, 71, 101,
       140,142
                                                102, 103, 146
tooth stick (miswak) 32, 134             weapons 86, 95
                                         weddings 36
Torah 52, 135                            weeping 61, 84, 140, 156
trade 25, 36-37, 119, 124                wisdom 26, 50, 52
travel 40-41, 41, 79, 97, 108            wives 79, 81, 83, 92-93, 111, 157
travellers 59, 73, 109, 130-132, 152
trees 133, 136, 152                      women 32-33, 43, 46-47, n 79, 108,

trials. See fitna                               124-125, 143
                                         world
trusts, keeping 37, 47, 49-50, 53, 64,
       71,92                                love of 43, 72-73, 74, 122
                                             pleasures of 30
truthfulness 36-37, 44, 54, s6, 57, 70,  worship 44-45, 72
       125, 145, 150                         moderation in 53-54, 157-158
                                             neglecting 87
turban 88                                    obligatory 58
                                             sincerity in 24-25, 46, 87, 106,
u
                                                131, 146
'UMAR IBN AL-KHATTAB ,61 ~               wwju' (ablution) 28, 31, 108,
       158 ,131-130
                                                109-110, 132-133, 148
Umma 40, 48, 55, 69, 93, 114, 123,
       157                               y

UMM SALAMA 143 ~                         youth 45, n 81, 82
unbelievers
                                         z
    emulating 75, 76, 88
    inclination toward 61, 70-71         zakat 58, 6o, 74, 118, 130
    in this world 30, 58, 59, 76
                                         Zam Zam water 148
usury. See interest
                                         zuhd (abstinence) 56, 72-73, 90-91
'UTHMAN 158 ~                            :?Ulm. See oppression

v

vain hope 24, 34, 64

w

wajib acts 110
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am eternally grateful to my parents for instilling in me the love for Allah
and His Messenger and to my teachers, who nurtured and strengthened
that love and provided me with a deeper understanding, and without whom
this work would have been a blunder in the dark. My wife and children
can never be forgotten for their constant patience and motivation. I thank
Shaykh Abdullah Jeena for the indefinite use ofhis copy ofMirqiit al-mafiitl~,
Imam Tahir Anwar for the use of his copy of Mishkiit al-Ma~iibl~, and I
thank Saleem Nuri and Aiyub Palmer for language editing; Amir Toft for
his continuous help with this and other works; Shaykh Khalid Sattar, Iman
Moody, Haroon Moghul, and the other readers for their involvement and
feedback; Brooke Santos for her indexing; Ather Ali for such an inspiring
cover design; and my brother Mawlana Shoeb Mangera for his constant
persistence to complete this second edition. May Allah grant them all success
in this world and the Hereafter.
Alsoftom
WHITE THREAD PRESS

Prayers for Forgiveness
The Path to Perfection
Saviours ofIslamic Spirit
Sufism & Good Character
The Differences ofthe Imams
Absolute Essentials ofIslam
Ghazali's The Beginning of Guidance
Reflections ofPearls (Printed Edition)
Fiqh al-Imam: Key Proofs in Hanafi Fiqh
The Islamic Laws ofAnimal Slaughter
Birth Control and Abortion in Islam
$alat & Salam: A Manual ofBlessings on Allah's Beloved
Imam Abu l:fanifa's Al-Fiqh al-Akbar Explained
Ascent to Felicity (Maraqi 'l-Sa'ddat)

Reflections ofPearls (Audio Book)
Saviours ofIslamic Spirit (Audio)

                              PRESS
www.whitethreadpress.com
T HE MESSENGER OF ALLAH, MUI;IAMMAD !ill, was given exceptional
         oratorical skills. His words were eloquent, comprehensive, and simple,
         conveying libraries of wisdoms and truths. The Messenger ~ himself said,
"I have been sent with the jawiimi' al-kalim" (Bukhiiri)-that is, concise language

 that expresses a multitude of meanings in few words.
     Bookstores and libraries today are full of books of proverbs, coined by his-

 torical personages and political and religious leaders. But each of these pales in
 comparison to the eloquence of the Messenger of Allah !ill and philosophers and
 sages seem nothing more than struggling students in the light of his divinely
 inspired wisdom.

     This book is a collection of 327 i).adiths which the author, Shaykh 'Ashiq Ilahi
 al-Bulandshehri, compiled from 'Allama Tabrizi's renowned i).adith compilation,
 Mishkiit al-Ma~iibib. The book contains many jawiimi' al-kalim, as well as proph-
 ecies and other accounts and narratives.

     The book is ultimately a compilation of i).adiths meant to inspire the souls of to-
 day's Muslims and give them a glimpse at the charisma of the Prophet Mui).ammad
 ~ and a roadmap with which they can achieve closeness to their Lord.

 ABDUR-RAHMAN IBN YusuF, born and raised in London, studied in England, India,
 South Africa, and Syria. After memorizing the Qur'an, he continued his education
 graduating from Darul Uloom in Bury, England, with a degree and formal autho-
 rization in the Islamic Sciences, and specialized in legal judgment (iftii') at Mazahir
 Uloom Saharanpur, India. He also has a PhD in Islamic Studies from SOAS (Uni-
 versity of London) and is the author and translator of many books including Fiqh
 al-Imam, Prayers for Forgiveness and Imiim Abu lfanifa's Al-Fiqh al-Akbar.
